THE FOLLOWING NIGHT I had a nightmare such as I hadn’t had since childhood.
I was in the mansion. It was dark. Dubreuil was there. We were in an immense, dark drawing room. The very high walls were as black as those of a dungeon. The room was lit only by the flickering flames of chandeliers that gave off a smell of old wax burning. Dubreuil was staring at me intensely, holding a sheet of paper in his hand. Catherine, a little farther on, was wearing only a black leotard and high-heel shoes, her hair in a ponytail. She was holding a big whip that she regularly cracked on the floor with unsuspected violence, grunting like a tennis player who has just served. Stalin was opposite her, furiously barking after each crack of the whip. Dubreuil didn’t take his eyes off me, displaying the calm air of someone who knows he is all-powerful. He held the sheet of paper out to me.
“Hey! It’s your mission!”
I took the paper with a trembling hand and tipped it toward the flames to read it. Names. A list of names and next to each one, an address.
“What is it?”
“You’ve got to kill them. All of them. It’s your first mission. The first.” Catherine’s whip cracked very loudly, setting off a flood of barking.
“But I’m not a criminal! I don’t want to kill anyone!”
“It’ll do you good,” he said, separating each word.
A wave of panic came over me. My legs were shaking. My jaw was
trembling.
“No, it won’t. I don’t want to. At all. I don’t want to.”
“You need to, believe me,” he said in a wheedling voice. “It’s because of
your history, you understand. Your past is in darkness that you’ll learn to come out of. Don’t be afraid.”
“I can’t,” I panted. “I can’t.”
 “You have no choice.”
His voice was insistent. His eyes were boring through me as he slowly advanced toward me.
“Don’t come near me! I want to leave!”
“You can’t. It’s too late.”
“Let me go!”
I rushed to the great drawing room door. Locked. I rapidly turned the
handle in every direction.
“Open up!” I screamed, banging with my fists. “Open this door!” Dubreuil was getting closer. I turned around, my back to the door, and
crossed my arms in front of my chest.
“You can’t force me! I will never kill anyone!”
“Remember: You gave your word!”
“And if I took it back?”
My reply brought an immense laugh from Dubreuil. A demonic laugh
that froze my blood.
“What’s the matter? What’s making you laugh?”
“If you break your word ...”
He turned toward Catherine, a snarl on his lips. Catherine looked at me
and gave a broad smile that was a grimace, a hideous smile that made me want to be sick.
“If you break your word,” he went on in a slow, sardonic voice, as the flames gave a diabolical glow to his face. “If you break your word, then I’ll put your name on a list, a list that I will give to someone else.”
At that moment, behind me, I heard the lock activate. I turned around, opened the door, pushed the servant aside, and fled across the hall.
“You gave your word! You gave your word! You gave your word!”
I woke with a start, panting, in a sweat. The sight of familiar objects around me brought me back to a universe that was known, controlled.
I was both reassured to realize that it was only a dream and disturbed at the thought that reality might be just as I had imagined it in my nocturnal ravings. After all, I knew nothing about Dubreuil and his real intentions. I had entered a game of which I knew neither the rules nor the purpose. The only certainty: I couldn’t get out of it. That was the rule of the game that I had been mad enough to accept.

 It was 6 A.M. I got up and slowly got ready to go to the office. Life was reasserting itself, and I really had to get back to work, even if the very idea of going back to that vipers’ nest was enough to undermine my morale.
Vanessa leapt on me as soon as I arrived, pursuing me down the corridor leading to my office.
“I didn’t know if you were coming in today or not, but until I heard from you, I let your appointments stand. To be frank, Fausteri wasn’t too pleased about your absence yesterday. But I stood up for you. I told him that you sounded like death on the phone and that you’d looked really ill the day before. I don’t mean to boast, but if I hadn’t been there, he’d probably never have believed you.”
Vanessa loved situations that gave her an opportunity to show she was indispensable, even if she had to make them up. I would never know if Fausteri had even noticed my absence. Indeed, Vanessa had such a need for recognition that she was quite capable of killing two birds with one stone, covering for me while at the same time earning congratulations for bringing my unjustified absence to our boss’s attention. I trusted her no farther than I could throw her.
Luc Fausteri, the head of the Accounting and Financial Sector Recruitment Department, in turn reported to the director of the recruitment side of the company, Grégoire Larcher. Dunker Consulting was a European leader in human resources, with two big internal divisions: Recruitment and Training. The company had been floated on the stock exchange two months after my arrival. This was a matter of pride for our CEO, Marc Dunker, who now saw himself as a captain of industry, despite the fact that the company had only a few hundred employees, admittedly spread over three countries. The first decision Dunker took after our stock market flotation was to purchase a luxury car with a chauffeur. The freshly garnered money had to be used somehow. His second decision was to appoint a bodyguard, as if listing the company on the Paris stock exchange made its boss a prime target for the local underworld. The bodyguard followed Dunker everywhere, in a dark suit and shades, constantly looking around as if to locate snipers hidden on the roofs.
But the real change when the company went public was of a cultural nature: The atmosphere changed overnight. All eyes were now riveted on the share price. At first, everyone was caught up in IPO frenzy, filled with

 enthusiasm as we watched the price climb. But this quickly became an obsession for all our managers. It’s true that the company now had to publish its results every quarter, and mediocre figures would make the share price fall at once. The management regularly issued press communiqués, but it was difficult to keep on announcing good results. In a business, you don’t have hot news to reveal every day, and yet we had to “keep up the pressure on the press,” as our CEO said. Feeding reporters positive results quickly became a form of slavery.
Over the years, the company had grown through its professionalism, its reliability, and the quality of the services it rendered to its customers. Special care was given beforehand to each recruitment undertaken for a client. We did everything to find the rare pearl, the candidate who had not only the right skills and abilities but also the character and temperament to fit in well, get along with their new boss, and be successful in handling the responsibilities entrusted to them.
Since the stock flotation, all that had become of secondary importance. Of primary importance now were the turnover figures announced to the press at the end of the quarter, and therefore the number of recruitments entrusted to us by clients. Apart from their recruitment role, the consultants now had to seek out new business. Not really my cup of tea. But we absolutely had to bring in new clients, new contracts, and increase “turnover.” The orders were to spend a minimum of time on interviewing candidates and a maximum on looking for new business. The job was being emptied of its substance, losing the noble meaning it had had in my eyes.
Relations between colleagues had also changed entirely. Any camaraderie, any team spirit I had known in the first two months had given way to frenzied selfishness, every man for himself, stimulated by competitive challenges. It was obvious that the company was the loser since to survive, each member of the team put obstacles in the way of the others, to the detriment of the common interest. Admittedly, we no longer wasted time around the coffee machine as we used to, gossiping about candidates’ slips and lies, but those moments of relaxation had contributed to developing a feeling of belonging, to making us love the company and motivating us to serve its interests.
Besides, what is a company if not a group of people with whom you share emotions while working on a project? Making an abstract number like

 turnover go up is not a project. And making us compete with each other did not create positive emotions.
The phone rang. Vanessa announced that my first appointment had arrived. A glance at my diary showed that seven were scheduled. A long day ahead.
I rapidly scanned my e-mails: 48 in just one day off. I immediately clicked on the one from Luc Fausteri. As usual, the subject field was blank. A laconic message:
You must catch up with the work lost as a result of your day off. I must remind you that you are already behind with your monthly target.
Regards, L.F.
The Regards in the automatic signature stuck out like a sore thumb. Copy circulated to Grégoire Larcher and all my colleagues in the department. What a pain!
I met my candidate and the interview began. It was difficult to concentrate, to get involved in my duties. I had left the office the night before convinced that I would never set foot in it again. In my mind, this job had been wiped out of my future. In the end I had remained alive, but it was as if all the data had not been updated in my brain. Now this place seemed almost foreign, and my presence here had no real meaning.
I managed to get away around seven o’clock. A miracle. Outside the building I had barely set foot on the sidewalk of the Avenue de l’Opéra, when a man in a navy blue blazer came up to me. A real hulk of a man with pale, expressionless blue eyes, flat cheeks, and no cheekbones. Instinctively, I took a step back.
“Monsieur Greenmor?”
I hesitated a second before replying.
“Monsieur Dubreuil is waiting for you,” he said, discreetly pointing to a
long black Mercedes parked half on the sidewalk.
The tinted glass windows prevented me from seeing inside. Somewhat
apprehensively, I followed the man, who opened the back door for me. I slid inside with a twinge of anxiety. A faint smell of leather. Dubreuil was

 sitting next to me, but the width of the car allowed us to keep a certain distance. Before the driver shut the door, I had time to catch the intrigued look of Vanessa, who was just leaving the building.
Dubreuil remained silent. A minute later, the Mercedes pulled away. “You’re going home late,” he finally said.
“Sometimes I stay a lot later, occasionally as late as nine o’clock,” I
replied, pleased to be able to fill the silence, which fell again right after. Eventually, he broke the silence. “I’ve thought a lot about your case. In fact, you’ve got several problems fitted inside each other. The kernel is your fear of people. I don’t know if you really realize it, but you not only do not dare impose on anyone or really express your wishes, you also have great difficulty going against someone else’s wishes and expressing a frank
refusal. In short, you’re not really leading your own life.
“The first tasks I’m going to give you will teach you to overcome your
apprehensiveness so that you can accept being in disagreement with others, can dare to contradict them, and can express your desires and get what you want.
“Then, you must accept not necessarily conforming to other people’s expectations, not always meeting their criteria or values. You must dare to display your differences, even if it upsets them. In short, you will have to let go of the image you want to project and learn not to care too much about what others think of you.
“When you fully assume your differences, then you will be able to examine other people’s ways and, if necessary, adapt to them. You will thereby learn to communicate better and interact with strangers, so you can create relationships based on mutual confidence and be accepted by people who don’t work like you. But first you must accept what makes you unique. Otherwise you will continue to be controlled by other people.
“I will also teach you to be persuasive, so that you will know how to get what you want. And then I will get you to dare to have new experiences, implement your ideas, make your dreams real. In short, I’m going to blow apart the shackles that are binding you today, that without you even realizing it are completely imprisoning you. I will liberate you so that you can live your life and live it to the fullest.”
“And you’re going to make me do certain things so that I can learn all that?”

 “Do you think that by continuing to lead your little life as you’ve led it till now, things will change for you? Besides, you saw where it led you.”
“Thanks for reminding me. I’d forgotten.”
“Even if it doesn’t drive you to such an extreme, life is long and boring, Alan, when you don’t live it as you’d like.”
“No point trying to convince me, since you’ve got my agreement in any case.”
The Mercedes had turned onto the Boulevard Haussmann and was driving fast down the bus lane, past all the cars caught in rush-hour traffic.
“It’s by rubbing up against reality that you’ll realize it’s not so dreadful,” Dubreuil said. “And then you’ll be able to do things that you’re not permitting yourself to do at present. I also want to make you change your relationship to the events of life. Listening to you yesterday, I was often surprised by the way you function on a day-to-day basis. I think you frequently adopt the role of the victim.”
“The role of the victim?”
“It’s just a figure of speech to indicate a sort of posture that certain people adopt without thinking. It consists of living as though what happens to us has been imposed on us, that it’s something we experience despite ourselves.”
“I don’t think I’m like that.”
“You probably don’t realize, but you put yourself in a victim position when you use expressions like ‘I’m not lucky,’ ‘Things aren’t as I would have liked,’ ‘I would have preferred ...’ When you describe your daily life, as soon as something doesn’t turn out the way you want, you tend to say ‘Too bad,’ or ‘That’s a shame,’ or ‘I don’t care,’ but you don’t say it with the wisdom of someone who is calmly accepting a situation. No, you say it with regret in your voice. It’s a resigned acceptance, and, what’s more, you sometimes remind yourself that it wasn’t your choice. And then you also tend to complain at times. All these are indications that you revel in the role of the victim.”
“Perhaps I adopt the role without being aware of it, but I certainly don’t revel in it.”
“Yes, you do. You inevitably find advantages to it. Our brain works that way. In each moment, it gets us to opt for what it considers to be our best bet. That is to say, in each situation you experience, your brain is going to

 select, from all the things you know how to do, whatever seems to be the most appropriate thing, the most opportune—whatever is going to bring you the most advantages. We all function like that. The problem is that we don’t all have the same array of choices. Some people have developed a variety of attitudes and behaviors, so that when they encounter a given situation, their brain has a wide range of possible reactions at its disposal. Others tend to always do more or less the same thing, and in that case, their range is limited, and the choice they make is seldom appropriate.
“I’ll give you an example: Imagine a discussion between two strangers in the street. One is unjustly criticizing the other. If the other has lots of strings to his bow, he will be able to prove that the criticism is wrong perhaps, or make light of it with a joke, or even ask pointed questions to force his accuser to justify his position. He can also put himself in the other person’s place and try to understand the origin of the criticism, in order to be able to put his critic right while staying on his good side. Alternatively, he could choose to ignore his critic altogether and simply go on his way. If he is capable of all that, then the instant he hears the criticism, his brain has numerous possible responses at its disposal, and there is a high probability that it will select one that is really appropriate to the situation—that optimizes his interests and is the most advantageous. Now imagine the same situation involving someone who doesn’t know how to do any of that. It’s probable that the only choice his brain has is to insult his critic or passively accept the criticism, no matter how unjustified it may be. Either way, that will be his best bet.”
“You’re saying I’m a bit limited, is that it?”
“Let’s say that when things don’t go your way, then yes, you don’t have many choices available, and you tend to put yourself in the position of the victim.”
“Supposing that’s true, what are the advantages I get from it?”
“From what I discovered yesterday, you like to be seen as someone who puts himself out for others, and you hope that in return you will be valued for your so-called sacrifices. And then you also enjoy being pitied and arousing people’s sympathy. Between you and me, that’s a load of bull. All the research shows that we are attracted to those who take responsibility for their choices and live with the consequences. In the end, you’re the only one who’s moved by your lamentations.”

 “Even so, objectively—really objectively—I think I’ve had less luck than others in life so far, beginning with my social background. I’m sorry, but it’s much easier to be happy when you’re born into a wealthy family where you’ve gotten all you want.”
“Stop! That’s bullshit, all that.”
“Absolutely not. Any sociologist will tell you that statistically, children from privileged social backgrounds are far more likely to go to college than children from underprivileged backgrounds and therefore to have access to better jobs.”
“But that’s got nothing to do with happiness! Besides, don’t forget you are an executive. Unfairness derives from the love and education a child receives from its parents; this, indeed, contributes to future happiness. In that regard, I agree, there are underprivileged people. But it’s unconnected to social background. Being rich doesn’t mean you know how to give love to your children, or the right dose of authority to bring them up successfully. Look around you.”
“Okay. But you can’t say I was lucky from that point of view either. I didn’t even have a father!”
“Yes, but now you are an adult, and you can learn to move beyond moaning and crying over your fate.”
The Mercedes turned onto the Boulevard Malesherbes and drove toward Rue des Batignolles. I was very annoyed by what he had said.
“Alan ...”
“What?” I snapped.
“Alan, there is no such thing as a happy victim. Do you hear? They don’t
exist.”
He fell silent for a few seconds, as if to allow his words to sink in. I felt
his phrase go like a knife to my heart, and now his silence was pushing the blade deeper into the wound.
“Right. So what do you do to stop yourself from slipping into the role of the victim? Because if, on top of everything else, it’s unconscious, I don’t see how I’m going to extricate myself.”
“In my opinion, the best way is to learn to do something else. Again, if pretending to be the victim is your best bet, it’s clearly because your brain doesn’t have many other possibilities. Therefore, you must develop some. You know, nature abhors a vacuum. So if you simply try to suppress the

 victim role and don’t know how to do anything else in its place, it won’t work. You’ll resist the change. The best thing is to discover that you can do something different. Then, I’m confident, your brain will quickly choose the new option of its own accord, if it brings you more advantages.”
“And what will this new option be?”
“Well, I’m going to teach you to get what you want on a daily basis. If you succeed, you won’t need to pretend to be the victim. Listen, I know it was only an anecdote, but you staggered me yesterday when you told me your lack of luck pursued you even in an insignificant act of everyday life like buying bread at the baker’s. You said you regularly get bread that’s got a hard crust but you prefer it soft!”
“That’s right.”
“You must be kidding! That means you’re not even capable of saying, ‘The crust on this one is overdone. May I have that one next to it?’”
“Of course, I’m capable of it! It’s just that I don’t want to put the baker out when there’s a shop full of customers waiting. That’s all.”
“But it would take only two seconds! You prefer eating crusty bread that you don’t like to taking two seconds of the baker’s time! No, the truth is, you don’t dare tell him. You are afraid of annoying him to get what you want. You’re afraid that he’ll think you are demanding and unpleasant, that he won’t like you. And you’re afraid that the other customers will be annoyed.”
“It’s possible.”
“On your deathbed you’ll be able to say, ‘I made nothing of my life. I got none of the things I wanted, but everybody thought I was nice.’ Brilliant.”
I was beginning to feel decidedly ill. I looked away from this man with his upsetting words and allowed my gaze to wander over the buildings, shops, and people we were passing by.
“I have some great news,” he went on.
Skeptical, I didn’t even bother to look at him.
“The great news is that all that is in the past. What’s more, you’ll never
again eat crusty bread. Never,” he said, looking around. “Vladi, stop.”
The chauffeur stopped the car and turned on the hazard lights. Cars
passed us, sounding their horns.
“What do you want from in there?” Dubreuil asked, pointing to a bakery. “At this moment, nothing. Absolutely nothing.”

 “Good. So you’re going to go in, ask for a loaf, a cake, anything, and when it’s given to you, you’ll find a reason to refuse it and ask for something else. Then you’ll invent another reason to refuse the second item, then the third and the fourth. And then you’ll say that, after all, you don’t want anything, and you’ll leave without buying a thing.”
“I can’t do that.”
“Yes, you can. In a few minutes, you’ll have proved it.”
“It’s beyond me.”
“Vladi!”
The chauffeur got out, opened the door for me, and waited. I looked
daggers at Dubreuil and then reluctantly got out. A glance at the bakery: the crowd before closing time. I felt my heart beating at top speed.
Inside, it was a hive of activity. I stood in line as if I were waiting for my turn to mount the scaffold. It was the first time since my arrival in France that the smell of fresh bread had repelled me. The shop assistant repeated the customers’ orders to the woman at the cash register, who repeated them out loud as she took the money. Meanwhile, the assistant was already taking care of the next customer. It was like a well-rehearsed ballet performance. When it was my turn, there were already eight or ten customers behind me. I swallowed hard.
“Monsieur?” she asked me in her very high-pitched voice. “A baguette, please.”
My voice was muffled, as though stuck in my throat.
“A baguette for monsieur!”
“One euro ten cents,” said the cashier.
The shop assistant was already talking to the next customer.
“Madame?”
“A pain au chocolat.”
“A pain au chocolat for Madame!”
“Excuse me, would you have one less well done, please?” I forced
myself to say.
“One euro twenty for Madame.”
“Here you are,” said the assistant, holding out another loaf.
“Mademoiselle, it’s your turn.”
“A sliced sandwich loaf, please,” Mademoiselle said.
“Hmm, excuse me. I’ll have a bran loaf, actually,” I squeaked.

 The slicing machine drowned out my voice. She didn’t hear me. “A sliced sandwich loaf for the lady!”
“One euro eighty.”
“Madame?” the shop assistant asked the next customer.
“No, excuse me,” I said, slightly louder. “I’ll have a bran loaf, actually.” “And a bran loaf with the baguette for monsieur!”
“That’ll be three euros fifteen then,” said the cashier.
“Young man, it’s your turn,” the shop assistant said to the next in line. “No,” I said. “It was instead of the baguette, not in addition.”
“Two loaves,” the young man called out.
“Right, that’s two euros five cents for the gentleman, and two euros ten for the young man.”
“Madame?” said the shop assistant.
I felt awful. I didn’t have the heart to carry on. A glance toward the car. The chauffeur was standing beside it, his arms folded. He wasn’t taking his eyes off me.
“Half a baguette, well done,” said an old lady.
“Excuse me,” I said to the assistant, “I’ve changed my mind. I’m sorry, but I’d rather have a half-baguette as well.”
“Make up your mind,” she said in her very high-pitched voice, taking the other half of the baguette she had cut for the old lady.
I was very hot. I was sweating under my suit.
“Sixty cents for the old lady and the same for the gentleman.” “Madame?” the shop assistant asked.
“I’m still thinking,” said a young woman who was looking at the cakes
with an obvious feeling of guilt.
She must be counting the number of calories in each one, I thought. “Another problem, monsieur?” the assistant asked, suspiciously.
“Look, I’m really sorry. I know I’m out of line, but a sandwich loaf. I
think I want a sandwich loaf. Yes, that’s it! A sandwich loaf!”
She stared at me with obvious annoyance. I didn’t dare turn around, but I had a feeling the customers stuck behind me were about to grab me by the collar and throw me out. She sighed, and then turned around to get the
sandwich loaf.
“Hang on! Stop! No, actually ...”

“Yes?” the assistant said in a choked voice, no doubt on the verge of hysterics.
“I want ... nothing. Actually, I don’t want anything. Thank you ... sorry ... thank you.”
I turned on my heels and walked past the line of customers, head down, without looking at them. At the door, I broke into a run, feeling like a thief.
The chauffeur was waiting with the car door open, as if I were a VIP, but I felt as ashamed as a little boy who has just been caught trying to steal a sweet from a stall. I dived into the Mercedes in a sweat.
“You’re as red as an Englishman who’s just spent an hour in the sun on the Riviera,” said Dubreuil, visibly amused.
“It’s not funny. Really not funny.”
“Anyhow, you see, you did it.”
I didn’t answer. The car moved off.
“Perhaps I went a bit far for a first time,” he acknowledged. “But I
promise you that in a few weeks you’ll be able to do it and treat it as a joke.”
“But it doesn’t interest me! I don’t want to become a pain in the neck! I can’t bear people who are a pain in the neck, who are too demanding and piss everyone off. I don’t want to be like them!”
“It’s not about you becoming a pain in the neck. I won’t make you go from one extreme to the other. I just want you to know how to get what you want, even if you have to put people out a bit. But he who can do more, can do less. I’m going to push you to do a bit more than necessary, so that later you’ll be quite at ease asking for what it’s normal for you to want.”
“So, what’s the next stage?”
“For the next few days, you will visit at least three bakeries a day, and you will ask for two changes of what you’re given. It’ll be easy.”
Compared with what I’d just done, that did indeed seem acceptable.
“For how long do I have to do this?”
“Until it becomes quite natural for you, requiring no effort. And
remember, you can be demanding and still remain nice. You don’t have to be unpleasant.”
The Mercedes pulled up in front of my apartment. Vladi got out and opened the door for me.
“Good evening,” said Dubreuil.
AFTER A WEEK, I knew all the bakeries in my district, the 18th arrondissement. In the end, I observed that the best bread was to be had in the bakery I usually patronized, next to my apartment. Now I was buying three baguettes a day and off-loading my surplus stock on Étienne. Delighted at first, he had the cheek to tell me after five days that he was fed up with eating bread.
Human beings are made in such a way that we get used to almost anything. I have to admit that what had demanded a superhuman effort to begin with needed mere resolve by the end of a week. All the same, I had to consciously prepare myself for the bakery routine. One evening, I met my neighbor at the baker’s, and we talked as we stood in line. When my turn came and I was served an overcooked baguette, I didn’t have the reflex to refuse it. Being distracted by my conversation was enough to make me revert to my old habit of automatically accepting what was given to me. In short, I was being well looked after, but I was still not cured.
My office life carried on, more dismal than ever. Was it to try and make up for the deterioration in the atmosphere that Luc Fausteri suggested that the consultants on his team join him every morning at 8 A.M. for a run? I was sure this ludicrous idea wasn’t his. He must have found it in a team- building book under a heading like How to change your employees into winners. The plan had obviously been approved by those higher up, however, since his boss, Grégoire Larcher, had okayed the installation of communal showers in the building.
So it was that most of the consultants found themselves every morning inhaling exhaust from the Avenue de l’Opéra and the Rue de Rivoli, or the scarcely less polluted air of the Tuileries Gardens. They ran without saying a word, my boss being about as talkative as a funeral director. In any case, the purpose of the exercise was no doubt to stimulate everyone’s ardor, not
 to develop camaraderie. Fausteri kept his distance from us as always. I had managed the feat of declining his offer, and no doubt the shop assistants in the bakeries of the 18th arrondissement had a share in this achievement. My painful experience at baseball had turned me off sports, and mixing with a group of out-of-breath men feeling virile because they’re exercising was more than I was capable of.
I arrived at the office each day at 8:55 A.M. so that I would already be hard at work when the team returned from its morning exploits. That way, the message was clear: While you’re prancing about, some of us are slaving away. That way, I was beyond reproach. Even so, the level of reproach had risen perceptibly. Having had an original idea for once, Fausteri was no doubt vexed that I wasn’t falling in line. He began to pick on me, to make remarks incessantly about anything or nothing, from the color of my shirts to the amount of time I spent on each interview.
But the crucial point was the number of recruitment contracts signed. Since our role as salesmen had taken on more importance than searching for candidates, we had been allocated individual business targets, with commissions tied to our sales. Now our department had a business meeting every Monday morning. The decision probably hadn’t come from Fausteri. Very introverted, he hated mixing with us. Larcher must have forced him to do it. But Luc Fausteri was very clever and had succeeded in evading the thankless task of leading the weekly meeting. Larcher managed it himself, which suited him; he liked to be involved in everything. Fausteri made do with remaining silently at his side, playing the role of the aloof expert who only opened his mouth when absolutely necessary. He would regard us with a mildly condescending gaze, wondering no doubt why the simple-minded always repeat the same idiotic remarks.
That particular morning, I met Thomas, a colleague, in the corridor.
“Well, we thought you’d died the day before yesterday,” he said, sarcastically.
If only you knew, my friend. “I must have picked up a virus going around,” I lied. “Fortunately, it didn’t last.”
“Right. I won’t get close to you then,” he said, taking a step back. “Even if it would suit you all if I was so ill I couldn’t give you the usual hiding at the end of the month!”

 Thomas was the consultant who got the best results, and he never missed an opportunity to remind us of it. I admit his figures were fairly impressive. He was a workaholic who put in impossible hours, regularly went without lunch, and was so focused on his targets that he sometimes forgot to say hello to people he walked past in the corridors. At any rate, he never stopped to chat, except when he had an opportunity to blow his own horn, either by announcing his quarterly results or by telling you that he had just bought the latest fashionable car or had eaten the night before in the trendy restaurant that all of Paris was talking about.
Everything about Thomas was calculated to serve his image, from the brand of clothes he favored to the Financial Times tucked casually under his arm when he arrived in the morning. Each gesture, each word, indeed everything he owned and did was an element of the persona he had carefully constructed and identified with. I would sometimes imagine Thomas naked on a deserted island without his Armani suit or Hermès tie or Weston loafers or Vuitton bag, without personal targets to reach or glory to obtain or anyone to impress. I could see him sliding into an infinite torpor, as unable to live without others’ admiration as the rubber plant in our waiting room could survive without Vanessa’s weekly watering.
But in fact, he would probably become the archetypal Robinson Crusoe, adopting the appearance and behavior of the exemplary shipwreck as diligently as he had cultivated that of the dynamic executive. Once he had been rescued by fishermen—amazed by his capacity for survival—he would have returned to France a hero, recounting his exploits of survival on every TV channel, while carefully preserving his eight-month beard and wearing a loincloth like nobody else. The context would change, but not the man.
“Having a chat, are we, then?”
Mickaël was another of my colleagues. He didn’t take himself seriously, but he did think he was cleverer than everyone else.
“It doesn’t matter for some of us,” retorted Thomas, quick as a flash.
Mickaël just laughed and walked away. Slightly tubby, with jet-black hair, he always wore a crafty look. His results were perfectly decent, although I suspected he took it fairly easy. Several times I had gone into his office unannounced. Each time he had given the impression he was absorbed in a candidate’s tricky case on his computer, but the images on his

screen, reflected in the glass doors of the bookcase behind his desk, made you wonder if candidates were so desperate for employment that they were sending naked photos of themselves in the hope of increasing their chances of getting a job as an accountant.
“He’s jealous,” Thomas said in a confidential tone.
Every week, companies contacted the firm with their recruitment needs and inquired about our terms and conditions. Vanessa took the calls, made out a file card for each query, and passed it on to a consultant. It goes without saying that we welcomed these leads. It was much easier to sign a contract with a company that had contacted us than to cold-canvass strangers by telephone. Vanessa was supposed to distribute the file cards evenly among us, but I had recently discovered that in fact she favored Thomas. Visibly fascinated by the image of a winner that he projected, she must take pleasure in the idea that she was vital to his success. I was sure I was the least favored member of the team, even though, on the rare occasions she passed a contract on to me, she did it in a way that suggested she was giving me alone a chance to profit from the only call that Dunker Consulting had received that month.
TWO WEEKS AFTER our first meeting, Dubreuil reappeared in circumstances similar to the previous time. When I came out of the office, I saw his Mercedes parked in the middle of the sidewalk.
Vladi got out, walked around the car, and opened the back door for me. I ground out my cigarette, frustrated because I had just lit up after spending the whole afternoon without smoking. I was less anxious than the previous time, but slight apprehension still tightened my stomach, as I wondered what fate lay in store for me today.
The Mercedes pulled away from the curb, making a U-turn on the Avenue de l’Opéra and heading toward the Louvre. Two minutes later, we were speeding along the Rue de Rivoli.
“So, were you physically thrown out of the Paris bakeries?”
“I’m going to eat sandwich bread from the supermarket for a month, the time it’ll take for people to forget me.”
Dubreuil gave a sadistic little laugh.
“Where are you taking me today?”
“See, you’re making progress! Last time, you didn’t even dare ask. You
allowed yourself to be driven like a prisoner.”
“I am a prisoner of my promise.”
“That’s true,” he confirmed with a satisfied air.
We arrived at the Place de la Concorde. The muffled silence inside the
luxurious sedan contrasted with the agitation of the drivers changing lanes in every direction and accelerating in spurts to try and overtake one or two cars. Big black clouds scudded across the sky above the Assemblée Nationale, as we turned onto the Champs-Élysées and the avenue opened up in front of us. The sky above the Arc de Triomphe was clear.
“So, where are we going?” I repeated.
 “We’re going to test your progress since the last time, to make sure that we can go on to something else.”
I didn’t like the wording. It reminded me of certain tests that my firm made the candidates take.
“I never told you, but I have a distinct preference for theoretical tests, the ones with pieces of paper and boxes to check,” I said.
“Life isn’t a theory. I believe in the virtue of experience lived in the raw. That’s the only thing that really changes someone. All the rest is waffle, intellectual masturbation.”
“So, what have you cooked up for me today?” I asked, putting on an air of self-confidence, whereas in fact my heart was in my boots.
“Well, let’s say we’re going to bring this chapter to an end by taking our business elsewhere.”
“Elsewhere?”
“Yes, instead of the local bakery, you’re going to a prestigious jeweler.” “You’re joking?” I said, suspecting that unfortunately, he was doing
nothing of the sort.
“Indeed, there’s not much difference between them.”
“Of course, there is! There’s no comparison!”
“In both cases, you’re dealing with someone who’s there to sell you
something. It’s the same. I don’t see what the problem is.”
“Of course you do! Don’t play the fool!”
“The main difference is located in the head.”
“But I’ve never set foot in a big jeweler’s. I’m not used to that sort of
place.”
“You have to start someday. There’s a first time for everything.”
“The place will make me feel awkward before I even open my mouth.
Your dice are loaded ...”
“What’s troubling you, exactly?” he said, an amused smile on his lips.
“I don’t know. Those people aren’t used to dealing with people like me. I
won’t know how to behave.”
“There’s no special code. It’s a shop like any other, except that it’s more
expensive. That gives you the right to be harder to please!”
The Mercedes stopped at the top of the Champs-Élysées. Vladi turned on the hazard warning lights. I stared straight in front of me, guessing that my scaffold was on my right, just over there, within eyeshot. I plucked up my

 courage and slowly turned my head to the right. The stone building was imposing, with an immense shop window more than two stories tall. Above it, in gold letters, was the name of my executioner: Cartier.
“Imagine,” Dubreuil said, “what your life will be like when there is no longer any situation in the world that can make you feel awkward.”
“Great. But as things stand, I’m a long way away from that.”
“The only way to get there is to rub up against reality—to go and face the object of your fears until the fear disappears, not hide somewhere, which only heightens your fear of the unknown.”
“Perhaps,” I replied. But I wasn’t convinced.
“Come on, tell yourself that the people who are going to serve you are people just like you—wage-earners who probably can’t afford to buy jewelry at Cartier’s either.”
“What do I have to do exactly? What’s my mission?”
“You’re going to ask to be shown watches. You must try on a good dozen or so, ask lots of questions, and then leave without buying anything.”
My stress went up a notch.
“And there’s something else.”
He took his cell phone, dialed a number, and a discrete ringing went off
in his inside pocket. He got out a small, flesh-colored device, pressed it, and the ringing stopped.
“Put this in your ear. That way, I can listen to your amazing feats, and you can hear me if I have things to say to you.”
I was dumbstruck.
“What’s all this about!”
“One last thing ...”
“What?”
“Have fun. It’s the best piece of advice I can give you. If you manage to
do that, it’s in the bag. Stop taking everything seriously. Step back and see this test as a game. That’s what it is, isn’t it? A game. There’s nothing to lose, just things to find out.”
“Hmm.”
“You know, one can see life as a series of pitfalls to be avoided, or as a vast playground that offers enriching experiments at every street corner.”
I didn’t answer but opened the car door and got out. The traffic noise hit me, and a warm wind woke up my dulled brain.

I took a few steps, lit a cigarette and smoked it, taking my time. With a bit of luck, the police would come and tell the Mercedes to move on.
Dubreuil had spoken of a test. He wanted, he said, to test my progress. That probably meant he would set other unpleasant tasks for the weeks ahead. To free myself, I absolutely had to pluck up my courage and manage a satisfactory performance. I had no choice, in any case. He wouldn’t let go; I was sure of that.
I tossed my cigarette on the sidewalk and vigorously ground it out, turning my foot from side to side longer than necessary. As I looked up at the glass window of this temple of luxury, a shiver ran down my spine. Come on, chin up, I told myself.
SWALLOWING HARD, I pushed the revolving door. An image of my mother exhausting herself in the laundry flashed across my mind. Three young men in dark suits were standing in the spacious entrance hall, their arms by their sides. One of them opened the second door into the shop. I tried to assume a confident air, even though I was being dropped into a universe that was totally alien to me.
The door opened into a vast space with a high ceiling, dominated by a monumental staircase. The room was furnished with display counters in precious woods, sparkling like mirrors. A great, glittering chandelier hung overhead. Walls hung with velvet absorbed the light. I detected a subtle perfume, barely a scent, calming and captivating at the same time. A thick dark red carpet muffled the noise of my footsteps. Then a pair of woman’s shoes, very beautiful, extremely feminine with stiletto heels, was coming toward me, one after the other, delicately. I looked up at slim legs that went on forever, then a short black skirt, tight, topped by a narrow-waisted jacket. Very narrow-waisted. When I finally lifted my head, I was looking into the ice blue eyes of a glacial beauty with blonde hair, perfectly smooth, done up in a chignon.
She looked straight at me and spoke in a very professional voice: “Good evening, sir, what can I do for you?”
She didn’t smile in the slightest, and I wondered, paralyzed, whether she was behaving as usual or she had already marked me as an intruder, someone who would never be a customer. I felt unmasked, stripped bare by her confident gaze.
“I’d like to see your men’s watches,” I managed to say.
“Our gold collection or our steel one?”
“Steel,” I replied, pleased to be able to choose a range less distant from
what I was used to.
 “Gold! Gold!” Dubreuil screamed in my earpiece.
I was afraid the sales assistant would hear his voice, but she didn’t seem to notice. I remained silent.
“Follow me, please,” she said in a tone of voice that immediately made me regret saying steel, a tone that meant I knew it. Hateful.
I followed her, looking down at her shoes. You can tell everything about a person by watching the way they walk. Her walk was definite, studied, nothing spontaneous. She led me to the first room and headed for one of the wooden vitrines. A tiny golden key moved between her fingers, with their perfectly manicured red nails, and the glass top rose up. She took out a tray lined in velvet, on which the watches were enthroned.
“Here we have the Pasha, the Roadster, the Santos, and the famous Tank Française. Each has a self-winding mechanical movement.”
I wasn’t listening to what she said. Her words resounded in my head without me trying to give them a meaning. My attention was caught by the precise gestures accompanying her words. She pointed to each watch with her long fingers, not quite touching them. Her gestures alone seemed to increase the prestige of these inert assemblies of metal parts.
I was supposed to ask to try the watches on, but her words and her gestures revealed such perfection that I feared sounding like an idiot. Then I remembered that Dubreuil was listening. I had to take the plunge.
“I’d like to try this one on,” I said, pointing to a watch with a steel-and- rubber band.
She put on a white glove, as if her fingerprints might spoil its beauty, then grasped the watch with her fingertips and held it out to me. I was almost embarrassed to take it in my bare hand.
“It’s one of our latest creations. A quartz movement in a steel case, with chronograph function and three counters.”
A quartz watch. Not even a real clock mechanism. You could find thousands of quartz watches on the market for less than ten euros.
I was about to slip it on when I suddenly realized that I was wearing my own watch on my wrist. A wave of shame washed over me. I couldn’t show her the novelty plastic watch that was hidden under my jacket sleeve. So I took it off with a gesture that was no doubt grotesque, shielding it with the palm of my hand as I stuffed it in my pocket.
“You can put it on the tray,” she said.

 I was convinced that she had seen my unease and wanted to increase it. I declined her offer. My face was burning. Rattled, I said the first thing that came to mind: “How long does the battery last?”
Instantly, my embarrassment increased tenfold. I must be the first customer in the history of Cartier to have asked such a question. Who among their clientele would be bothered about the life of a battery?
The sales assistant gave herself several seconds to reply, as if to give me time to realize how out of place my question was and to allow my shame to work its way deep down. Sheer torture.
“A year.”
I barely heard her. I had to calm down, refocus. I tried to relax, examining the watch with false interest. I quickly slipped it on my wrist, anxious to show how much I was used to handling this sort of luxury item. I tried to fasten the watchband just as quickly but was brought to a dead halt when the folding deployant clasp jammed. I must have tried to close the wrong part first. I began again, but still couldn’t close it properly.
“The clasp opens the other way,” she said. “May I?”
I was overcome with shame; my face was crimson. I was afraid the beads of sweat on my forehead would drop on the tray. To avoid this supreme humiliation, I stepped back from the counter a few inches.
Now I was holding out my wrist like a fugitive surrendering to a policeman to be handcuffed. The ease with which she closed the clasp only increased my feeling of clumsiness.
I pretended to evaluate the aesthetics of the costly watch, waving my arm around in the air to look at it from different angles.
“How much is it?” I asked, as casually as possible, as if it was merely a routine question.
“Thirty-two hundred and seventy euros.”
I thought I caught a hint of satisfaction in her voice, the sort certain instructors evince when they tell you you’ve failed your driving test or scored at the bottom of the curve on your SATs.
Was she serious—3,270 euros for a quartz watch with a steel-and-rubber band? I would have liked to ask her the difference between that and a 40- euro Swatch. Dubreuil would no doubt have appreciated the question, but it was beyond me. As yet. On the other hand, bizarrely, the price, which struck me as outrageous, helped me loosen up a bit. It freed me from the

 pressure I was inflicting on myself, as the magic of the luxury universe— and the awe it had elicited in me—vanished.
“I’d like to try that one on,” I said, pointing to another watch and taking off the Chronoscaph.
“The Tank Française, designed in 1917,” she said. “Mechanical movement, automatically self-winding.”
I put it on, this time without fumbling with the clasp, and turned my wrist this way and that.
“It’s not bad, but ... “ I said, pretending to hesitate.
That made two watches. How many was I supposed to try on? Didn’t he say fifteen? I was beginning to relax a bit, just a bit, when I heard Dubreuil’s voice, more discreetly this time.
“Tell her you think they’re ugly and you want to see the gold watches!” “I’d like to see that one,” I said, pretending not to hear.
“Tell her they’re ...”
I coughed to cover the sound of his voice. What would she think if she
heard? The idea crossed my mind that I might look like a thief connected to an accomplice outside. For all I knew, the security cameras had already detected my earpiece. I started to sweat. I had to hurry up and accomplish my mission, so I could get it over with and get out.
