WOULD MY TASK be harder with Grégoire Larcher, Fausteri’s boss? I wasn’t sure. If Fausteri didn’t like conversations devoid of intellectual interest, Larcher couldn’t bear any that distracted him from his objectives. Each second of his time must be invested in building his success.
Nonetheless, this left an opening. As a skillful manipulator, he would occasionally agree to exchange twaddle if he felt that it would help his colleague. A fulfilled employee is a productive employee, Larcher figured, and in the end, there was a lot to be gained that way.
So I didn’t have too much difficulty getting him to talk about his children. This brought us to weekends and excursions with the children, and marionettes cropped up in the conversation as naturally as could be.
Manipulating a manipulator was rather pleasurable, actually.
I got five text messages from Dubreuil during the day, each time making me go down to the street to smoke a cigarette. I still didn’t understand the real reason for it.
My day finished in Alice’s office, where she again confided in me her worry about the dysfunction of the company. Thomas came to say good-bye as he left, waving under our noses the latest BlackBerry he had just acquired. An irresistible urge suddenly came over me.
“I met an impressive candidate today,” I said. “A great guy.”
Every time anyone said anything good about someone in front of Thomas, his smile froze, as if his value was suddenly placed in peril by the other person’s achievements.
“He’s an ex-finance director,” I continued. “Very clever and incredibly classy. A real class act!”
Alice looked at me, a little surprised by my choice of words.
I kept on. “He got out a pen to take notes. Guess what it was?”
 “A Mont Blanc?” Thomas said, thinking of the pen he was always waving around in front of people.
“Bad luck. Try again.”
“Go on, what was it?” he said with a forced smile.
“A Dupont. With a gold nib! Can you believe it? A Dupont!”
I opened my eyes wide to underline my words. Thomas’s smile looked
strained. I saw from Alice’s expression that she understood my little game. “A real Dupont?” she asked, pretending to be incredulous.
“Really.”
“Wow! What a guy!” Alice said, continuing to play along.
“One thing’s for sure. You don’t see one of those every day,” I added.
Now Alice was unstoppable. “It really gives off the image of a winner,” she enthused. “In my opinion, he’s not going to have any problems finding a great job.”
I wondered how far we could go before Thomas would start getting suspicious.
“I’m sure all the girls fancy him,” Alice said.
“You bet!” I agreed.
Now we were going too far, I figured. But Thomas just continued to look
annoyed. He was so convinced that people valued him because of the objects he displayed that he was unable to see the absurdity of what we were saying. It was too close to his vision of the world.
Finally he wished us good night and left. We waited for him to be out of earshot, then burst out laughing.
It was nearly 8 P.M., and I soon left the office myself. When I got to the sidewalk, I couldn’t help glancing around. Nobody seemed to be looking for me. I went down into the Métro but had to turn around and come right out again: Dubreuil was texting me to have another cigarette. The coincidence in the timing was disturbing. I looked carefully around again. There were fewer pedestrians passing by at this late hour, but I spotted nothing out of the ordinary.
Three minutes later, I was again in the Métro. I decided to have a go at gestural synchronization, which I had neglected until now. I had preferred to approach the universe of the other by trying to take on his way of thinking, his worries, and his values.

 A train came into the station with a screeching of wheels as shrill as the sound of chalk on a blackboard. A homeless guy slouched on a bench grunted something incomprehensible, spreading a strong smell of alcohol all around him. The train came to an abrupt halt in front of me, and I got on. Dubreuil had promised that his method would allow me to create a relationship with people of very different cultures and attitudes than mine. I glanced at the few passengers in the car, spotting a tall African dressed in a tracksuit and black leather jacket. The jacket was open, revealing a fishnet T-shirt through which I could see his powerful chest muscles. I sat down opposite him, and then slouched down to adopt the same posture as his. I tried to meet his gaze, but he seemed lost in space. I tried to feel what he might be feeling, the better to enter into his world. Not easy. I was, it’s true, feeling a little buttoned-up in my suit. I loosened my tie and imagined I was dressed like him, with the same heavy gold chain around my neck. It was a strange sensation. He soon changed position, and I immediately did the same. I had to keep contact.
I didn’t take my eyes off him. A few seconds later, he crossed his arms. I crossed mine. I wondered how long it usually took to really create a link, so that he would start mirroring my movements. I really wanted to experience that. The man stretched out his legs. I waited a moment then stretched out mine. I wasn’t used to sitting slouched like this in the Métro, though I found it quite fun. Besides, I had never tried to put myself in the shoes of someone very different from myself, to behave like them and see what happened. The man put his hands on his thighs; I imitated him. He was staring straight in front of himself, but I don’t think he was really seeing me. He had a fixed expression on his face, which I tried to replicate. We stayed like that for a few moments, still perfectly in synch. His gaze remained inscrutable, but it seemed to me that something was bringing us closer. I was certain he must be feeling that we were on the same wavelength. He sat up straight in the seat, and I did the same. Then he looked me right in the eye, and I could tell he was going to say something. I was ecstatic. I had managed to create a bond with a stranger and force him to open himself to me. I marveled at the power of gesture over the unconscious, the superiority of the body over the word.
The man leaned forward, his expression serious, and with a heavy African accent said, “Ya finished taking da piss, mon?”

 15
THE NEXT MORNING, I arrived at the weekly meeting feeling quite carefree, never suspecting that I was going to live through one of the worst moments of my life, a moment that would also be the start of the most beneficial change possible.
That’s life. We seldom realize at the time that the difficult moments have a hidden function: to make us grow. The angels disguise themselves as demons and deliver marvelous presents wrapped up as foul parcels. Whether it’s a failure or an illness or the vicissitudes of daily life, we don’t always want to accept the so-called present, nor do we always have the impulse to unwrap it and discover the hidden message inside.
The meeting room was full when I arrived. There were far more of us than usual. Once a month, the whole recruitment department came together, not just our part of it. There was an unoccupied chair next to Alice, which she was probably saving for me. I threw my Closer down on the table and calmly took my place. It was nice to be the last one to arrive; you felt expected.
“Look at Thomas,” Alice whispered in my ear. I looked around and spotted him.
“What’s the matter?”
“Look again.”
I leaned forward to get a better look and saw nothing but the haughty air he usually had. Then I saw it. I couldn’t believe my eyes. A brand-new Dupont lying on the table in front of him. You couldn’t miss it. Next to me, Alice was covering her mouth with her hand to keep from laughing.
“Morning, all.”
The powerful voice made me jump. Marc Dunker, our CEO, had invited himself to the weekly meeting. I hadn’t even noticed him when I came in. Silence fell over the room.

 “I’m not going to interfere for long with your agenda,” he said. “But I wanted to tell you about a new type of assessment test that I discovered on a trip to Austria, where we’ve just opened our eighteenth office. I know you already have a good dozen or so tools at your disposal, but this one is different, and I wanted to introduce it to you personally.”
Our curiosity was aroused. What had he gone and found?
“We all know,” he went on, “that it is more difficult to assess someone’s character than their skills. You have all worked in the field for which you are recruiting, so you know how to ask the right questions to discover if the candidate has the necessary know-how to succeed in the given vacancy. On the other hand, it is not always obvious how to distinguish between his real talents and those he professes. I’m not even talking about the so-called shortcomings that ninety percent of your candidates claim. They all seem to be perfectionists with a tendency to work too hard, don’t they? But between imaginary talents and predictable defects, it’s not easy to get a precise reading of their tendencies at work. This test allows you to assess a character trait that is fundamental to many posts with responsibility, especially those that have a management function. I mean self-confidence. It’s extremely difficult to measure it during recruitment. I’ve known people who have had so many recruitment interviews that they are very sure of themselves in that setting, whereas if you put them in a business, they turn to jelly when faced with the first colleague who winds them up a bit. You can flex your muscles at an interview but not be able to stand up when faced with your team.”
“What you say is right, Marc, but most of the time, the person who lacks self-confidence in his life also lacks it in front of the recruiter.”
There was a murmur among those present. The person who had just spoken was a young consultant, freshly arrived at the firm, who had come from a rival company where first names were the norm. Of course, we consultants used first names among ourselves, but our boss had never given in to this fashion for relational pseudo-proximity and expected us to address him as Mr. Dunker. It was hypocritical, but Marc Dunker cared deeply about signs of respect from his staff.
“I didn’t know we were on first-name terms,” Dunker said dryly.
This was his usual putdown in these circumstances. He avoided responding to the consultant and continued: “The test I’m talking about is

 awkward to use because it requires the presence of at least three people. But they don’t have to be consultants. In practice, you can use just about anyone,” he said with a sneer.
Our curiosity was aroused.
“The test is based on the idea that real self-confidence is independent of other factors. It’s a personal characteristic that corresponds to a person’s unshakeable faith in their own value, in their abilities, so it can’t be harmed by external criticism. Conversely, unwarranted or phony self-confidence can’t stand up to a hostile environment, and the person loses a considerable part of their faculties when attacked. But I’ve said enough. A good demonstration is worth more than a long speech! I need a volunteer.”
He scanned the group, a little smile on his lips. Eyes looked at the ground or into space.
“The ideal thing would be a member of the Accountant Recruitment team, because we need someone good at math!”
Half the people there relaxed, while the other half got even tenser. The vise was tightening around us. He took his time, and I sensed he was deriving a sadistic pleasure from the suspense he was creating.
“Who’s going to volunteer?” he repeated.
It was obvious that no one was going to accept such an invitation without knowing what ordeal lay in wait.
“Right. Then I’ll have to choose the volunteer myself.”
I think the Nazis did the same sort of thing, inveigling prisoners to take responsibility for what their torturers were about to inflict on them.
“Let’s see, let’s see.”
I tried to look as unconcerned as possible, glancing down at the cover of my Closer. You could have heard a pin drop. The atmosphere was thick with tension. I felt Dunker’s heavy gaze bearing down on me.
“Mr. Greenmor.”
I was the volunteer. My heart skipped a beat. I had to hang on. Not weaken. He was going to make me do his pathetic test in front of all these people. Could it be revenge? Larcher had no doubt told him about our altercation at the last business meeting. Perhaps Dunker wanted to bring me back into line and remove any desire to do it again. Stay calm, I told myself. Don’t give in. Don’t give him that pleasure.
“Come on, Alan.”

 Okay, now he’s calling me by my first name. To soften me up, no doubt. I got up and walked toward him. All eyes were on me. Apprehension, still palpable a few seconds ago, had given way to curiosity. In fact, they might as well have been at the theater. Or more likely the Coliseum. I looked at Dunker. Ave Caesar, morituri te salutant. Hail Caesar, those who are about to die salute you. No, I’m not really the gladiator type.
Dunker pointed me to a chair two yards away from him, facing the group. I sat down, trying to appear both indifferent and sure of myself. Not easy.
“This is how it works,” he said, talking to the group. “First of all, it must be pointed out to the candidate that this is a game and that none of what we’re going to say to him corresponds to reality. It’s just for the test. It’s important to tell him this, in order not to get us into trouble. The press is giving us a rough enough time as it is at the moment.”
What was going on here? I could tell it was going to be no laughing matter. I had to hang in there at all costs.
“My role,” he went on, “is to give Mr. Greenmor some fairly simple mental arithmetic problems.”
Mental arithmetic? That was okay. I was expecting worse. I would be able to look after myself.
“Meanwhile,” he continued, “you’re going to say things to him, things that are rather unflattering—criticism, reproaches. In short, your objective is to undermine his morale by saying all the unpleasant things that come into your head. I know some of you don’t know Alan Greenmor well, or at all. It doesn’t matter. You’re not trying to say what’s true, just unpleasant criticisms to try and discourage him.”
What was this rubbish? I wasn’t going to let myself be lynched in public. “I don’t see the point of this test,” I said.
“It’s obvious, isn’t it? The candidate who has genuine self-confidence
will not be perturbed in any way by criticism that is not justified.”
I understood that Dunker had seen in me the ideal person to act as his stooge. He obviously felt that I was fairly easily unsettled. He was almost certain to make a brilliant success of his demonstration, to impress the crowd at my expense. I mustn’t take part. Absolutely not. I had nothing to gain and everything to lose. Quick: Find an excuse, anything, but get out of
it, I thought.

 “Mr. Dunker, this test seems to me to be very difficult to use in recruitment. It’s not very ethical.”
“There’s no problem as long as you are perfectly transparent. Besides, the candidate will be free to agree to it or not.”
“Precisely, nobody will agree to it.”
“Mr. Greenmor, you are a consultant, aren’t you?”
I hate people who ask you questions they know the answer to, just to
force you to confirm what they’re saying. I simply looked him in the eye. “So you ought to know that candidates are ready to do a lot to get a good
job.”
I wasn’t going to win on this line of argument. He would always have an
answer. Find something else to say right away ... or tell the truth.
“I don’t wish to take part in this exercise,” I said, getting up.
A murmur ran through the room. I was proud to have had the courage to
refuse. I probably wouldn’t have had it a few weeks before.
I had already taken three steps toward my seat when Dunker called out, “Do you know the definition of grave professional misconduct in French
law, Mr. Greenmor?”
I froze, still with my back to him. I didn’t answer. Total silence fell in the
room. I swallowed hard.
“Serious misconduct,” he went on in his odious voice, “is defined by the
employee’s intention to harm his employer. A refusal to take part in this test would harm me because it would undermine my demonstration in front of the whole team that has met specially for the occasion. That’s not your intention, Mr. Greenmor, is it?”
I remained silent, still with my back to him. The blood was beating in my temples.
No need to draw me a picture. I was perfectly aware of the consequences of grave professional misconduct: no notice, no severance pay, and loss of any accrued vacation pay. I would have to leave immediately, empty- handed.
“Is it, Mr. Greenmor?”
My body felt leaden, fixed to the ground. My head was empty.
“Make up your mind, Greenmor.”
Did I really have a choice? It was horrible. To be honest, I shouldn’t have
refused in the first place; I wouldn’t have found myself in this humiliating

 position. The only way out was to do his stupid test. I had to get a grip on myself. Swallow my pride. Come on. Come on. I made a superhuman effort and turned around. Everyone’s eyes were on me. I went back to the chair without looking at Dunker, sat down in silence, my eyes riveted on a spot on the ground. I was on fire. My ears were ringing. I had to get back in control again. Forget the shame. Gather my wits. Find the energy. Channel it. Breathe. Yes, that’s it. Breathe. Calm down.
He took his time, and then began to call out his calculations. “Nine times twelve?”
Don’t hurry to reply. I wasn’t his pupil.
“One hundred and eight.”
“Fourteen plus seventeen?”
“Thirty-one.”
“Twenty-three minus eight?”
I forced myself to slow the rhythm of my answers. I had to refocus,
gather my strength. I would need them. Zen. “Fifteen.”
He waved his arms at the group to invite them to make criticisms. I continued avoiding their eyes. I could hear coughs, an embarrassed hubbub and ... silence.
“It’s up to you, now!” he said, motioning them to jump in. “You must say anything negative that comes to mind about Mr. Greenmor.”
I had become Mr. again.
“Don’t worry,” he said to the group. “Let me remind you that you’re not trying to say what’s true. Besides, we all know that Alan has mainly positive qualities. It’s just a game, for the purpose of the test. Come on, speak your mind!”
So now I was Alan again. Almost his friend. And I only had positive qualities. What a manipulator.
“You’re useless.”
The first hostile remark.
“Eight times nine?” Dunker asked. “Seventy-two.”
“Forty-seven times two?” “Ninety-four.”

 “More, more,” he shouted at the group, waving his arms. He was berating my colleagues like a general urging his troops to come out of the trenches and fight under enemy fire.
“You can’t count!”
Second hostile remark.
“Thirty-eight divided by two?”
I took a deep breath in order to break the rhythm he was trying to impose. “Nineteen.”
“Go on! Go on!”
It was as if he was shouting at people pushing a broken-down car until
they reached the necessary speed to start the engine.
“You’re no good!”
So far the remarks had left me indifferent. They didn’t ring true; my
colleagues were even more embarrassed than I was. “Thirteen times four?”
“Fifty-two.”
“Amateur!”
“Thirty-seven plus twenty-eight?”
“Buck up!”
“Sixty-five.”
“Faster! Out with it!” Dunker shouted at the group. “Nineteen times three?”
“You’re dawdling!”
“Too slow!”
“Fifty-seven.”
“You’re rubbish at math!”
Dunker now had a satisfied smile on his face. “Sixty-four minus eighteen?”
“Useless!”
“You can’t count!”
“No good!”
The attacks were beginning to come from all over. I had to concentrate
on Dunker’s questions and forget about the others. Block them out. “Forty-six.”
“Second-rater!”
“Slacker!”

 “Hurry up!”
“You’re so slow!”
The machine was out of control now. Everybody was shouting at me at
the same time. Dunker had won.
“Twenty-three plus eighteen?”
“You don’t know.”
Don’t listen to them. Visualize the figures. Nothing but the figures: 23
and 18.
“You’re no good!”
“Much too slow!”
Nasty laughter in the room.
“Idiot!”
“Halfwit!”
“Dunce!”
“No hope, you’ve no chance!”
“You’re screwed!”
They were becoming like excited wild animals, as they entered into the
spirit of the game.
“Twenty-three plus eighteen?” Dunker repeated, all smiles. “Forty-two, no ...”
The smile grew wider.
“You goofed up!”
“Can’t count!”
“Forty-one.”
“Twelve plus fourteen?”
“You won’t get it!”
“You’re useless!”
“You’re pitiful!”
Twelve plus fourteen. Twelve, fourteen.
“Twenty-four. Twenty-six!”
“You’re worse and worse!”
“Eight times nine?”
“Rubbish!”
“Sixty-two. No ... eight times nine, seventy-two.”
“You don’t know your tables, moron!”

 I was going under. Completely. Had to refocus. Cut myself off from what I was feeling.
“Four times seven?”
“Idiot!”
“You won’t get it!”
“You don’t know!”
“You’re a waste of space!”
“Four times seven?” Dunker repeated. “You dummy!”
“Twenty ... four.” “You’ve screwed up!” “Cretin!”
“Dope!”
“Jerk!”
“Three times two?”
“Ha, ha! Can’t count!”
“Three times two?”
Laughter, loud and horrible. Some people were doubled over, laughing
hysterically. I didn’t know what I was doing anymore. “Two times two?”
“He’s forgotten his two-times table!”
“Two times two?” Dunker repeated, euphoric. “Moron!”
All of a sudden, Dunker stopped and silenced the group. “Okay, that’s enough!”
“Waste of space!”
“Stop, that’s enough! That’s enough!”
I was bewildered, stunned. I felt very, very ill. Dunker had realized this and immediately became serious. It had turned nasty. He knew he was responsible and must have known the risk he was running.
“It’s over,” he said. “We went a bit too far. This was just practice. In a real situation, we’d stop sooner. But here we were dealing with someone strong. It was all right, wasn’t it?” he said, looking at me. “I suggest we give Alan a round of applause for his courage. It can’t have been easy!”
Suddenly brought out of its trance, looking disconcerted and embarrassed, the group half-heartedly clapped. I caught sight of Alice, her

 eyes full of tears.
“Well done, my friend! You did really well,” Dunker said, giving me a
big slap on the back as I left the room.

 16
I FLED THE office, not bothering to finish the day. Nobody would dare criticize me for leaving. I left the building, turned left, and strode along the sidewalk with no particular destination. I just had to empty out the stress.
This painful experience had completely thrown me off center, and I felt violent anger toward Dunker. How could I now meet my colleagues’ eyes when I walked past them? That bastard had publicly humiliated me. He would pay for it. Dearly. I would find the way to make him regret playing with people like that.
The fact that the test had shown my lack of self-confidence paradoxically put me in a strong position. Things had gone too far, in public, and Dunker was responsible for that. I was probably in a position to give him a few problems on a legal level, and he must be aware of that. I was becoming almost untouchable.
I got a text message from Dubreuil and lit the prescribed cigarette. He would know how to help me get revenge, that was for sure. If only he would stop ordering me to light up all the time! Smoking is fine when you decide to do it but not when you’re made to.
Meditating on my revenge, I walked through the streets of Paris. The sky was threatening, full of big, black clouds. The air smelled of a thunderstorm. I was walking so fast that sweat began to gather on my brow. Was it the exertion or my anger? I could no doubt file a complaint and get some compensation, but then what? How could I carry on working in those conditions? The atmosphere would become unbearable. My colleagues would probably no longer dare to be seen in my company. Would I last long in such circumstances? Of course not.
Gradually, my anger gave way to bitterness, then despondency. I hadn’t felt so depressed since the day Audrey left me. She was a shooting star in my life, come to let me experience joy before disappearing in the night. If

 only she’d told me the reasons for her decision. If she had expressed criticism or blame, I could have blamed myself for her loss, or blamed her and thereby given her up more easily. As it was, her sudden, unexplained departure had prevented me from turning the page, from drawing a line under our relationship, and I missed her terribly. When my thoughts turned back to her, the loss tormented me. The memory of her smile bathed me in sadness. A part of me had disappeared with her. My body missed her body, and my soul felt orphaned.
It started to rain, a fine, melancholic drizzle. I carried on walking, slower now. I didn’t want to go home. Turning my back to the Louvre, I left the Rue de Rivoli and entered the Tuileries Garden, empty now, the people chased away by the rain. I walked along a path, under the trees. Finally, I sat down on an isolated stump. I thought of how unfair life could be. My childhood no doubt explained the lack of self-confidence I suffered from. I wasn’t responsible for it, and it tortured me. And as if that wasn’t enough, it attracted all the sorts for whom I was a natural victim, punishing me all over again. Life doesn’t spare those who are suffering; it inflicts a double penalty on us.
I remained like this for a long time. In the end, I got up and instinctively headed for Dubreuil’s neighborhood. He alone would be able to restore my morale.
The rain was beginning to stream down my cheeks and my neck. I felt as if it was washing me of what I had suffered, cleansing me of my shame.
I arrived at the gate to the mansion at the end of the day. The windows were closed, and the place seemed lifeless. I was suddenly certain that Dubreuil was not there. Usually he gave off such energy that it seemed possible to feel his presence even without seeing him, as if his aura could radiate through the walls.
I rang the videophone.
A man told me that monsieur had gone out. He didn’t know when he would be back.
“What about Catherine?”
“She is never here when he is away, sir.”
I wandered in the area a bit, finding pretexts not to go home, then had a
bite to eat in one of the few local restaurants. I was frustrated not to see Dubreuil. A thought entered my mind: Suppose he, too, was the sort

 attracted by my weakness? After all, I had met him in very special circumstances, where my fragility was totally exposed. All this brought me back again to his motives for taking an interest in me, for helping me. Why was he doing all this? I would so have liked to know more, but how? I had no means of investigating.
An image came back to me. The notebook. The notebook held clues to the answer, it was obvious. But how could I get to it without being devoured by his cursed dog? There must be a way. I paid my bill, bought Les Echos from the pile on the counter, and went back to the château, this time walking on the sidewalk across the avenue. I sat down on a bench and opened my paper. There were four rows of trees between me and Dubreuil’s gate. It seemed reasonable to assume that I could observe it without being spotted. I had an idea that I wanted to check out. I scanned Les Echos, reading news about businesses that, large or small, all had the same objective: increasing their market value. I occasionally looked up at the château. Nothing. Time went by slowly, very slowly. Around half past nine, a light came on in a ground floor room, soon followed by others in the neighboring rooms. I couldn’t see the window of Dubreuil’s office since it looked out onto the garden, at the back of the château. I looked closely but saw no one. I went back to my newspaper, keeping an eye on the windows. It would still be light for another half an hour. After that, it would be hard to remain credible with my newspaper open. I would have to find something else to do. I came across an article by Fisherman that once again expressed his doubts about Dunker Consulting’s strategy. “The management lacks vision,” he had written. Sad to say, I was pleased to read something negative about my company.
It was getting darker and darker. I was getting tired of waiting. The air, full of moisture after the rain, gave off the strong scent of the lime trees lining the avenue. In the end, I lay down on the bench, the newspaper acting as a pillow. I didn’t take my eyes off the château. Fewer and fewer cars were going by. The area was bathed in a surprising calm, barely disturbed from time to time by the distant noise of an accelerating motorbike.
At 10 P.M. precisely, I made out a slight noise far off, which I immediately recognized. It was the electric lock on the little door beside the mansion gate. I looked carefully but saw nobody. Yet I was sure I had heard the characteristic noise.

 The door to the house opened suddenly. I tensed. I wanted to sit up to see better, but I was afraid of drawing attention to myself. It was better to remain as I was. I saw nothing for several seconds, and then four people came out of the house together. They shut the door behind them and crossed the front garden, then exited through the little door that had been unlocked electronically from inside. It was the staff. They exchanged a few words briefly, and then separated. One of them crossed the avenue toward me. My pulse began to race. Had he spotted me? I decided to stay motionless. If he came up to me, I would close my eyes and pretend to be asleep. After all, I had called earlier in the evening and had been told about Dubreuil’s absence, so it wasn’t so far-fetched to have waited for him on a bench and then fallen asleep. And if he had come home in the meantime, I could very well have missed him while I was having dinner. I screwed up my eyes without losing sight of the servant. After reaching the pavement, he turned left and stopped at a bus shelter. I relaxed. I resumed my observation of the château, as the area was once more plunged into complete calm. Seven minutes later, a bus arrived. I checked to make sure that the man got on. It was 10:13 P.M. I was beginning to get stiff. Nothing more happened for a long while. My discomfort was becoming unbearable. Finally, I sat up, and at that precise moment, a powerful light came on, illuminating the garden in front of the château. I dived back down on my bench. The front door opened, and Dubreuil appeared. Immediately, Stalin began to bark, giving yelps of joy. His master went over to him. I heard his voice and saw the dog’s tail wagging. Dubreuil leaned over, and a moment later, Stalin was bounding all around him, freed from his chain. Half past ten precisely.
The dog stood up on its hind legs, and Dubreuil affectionately grabbed it by the neck. They played for a few minutes, and then the master went back inside and turned off the outside light, plunging the garden into darkness again. The dog ran off to the back of the château.
I got up, racked with pain, and walked to the bus stop. A glance at the timetable: The bus that had arrived at 10:13 P.M. was scheduled to come at 10:10. It was three minutes late.
So there were 17 minutes between the servants’ departure and Stalin’s release. Was that enough time for me to get into the house? Perhaps. But weren’t there other employees still inside? And how to get into the garden? After that, it would be easy to get into the château, since the windows

 remained open at this time of year, but how was I to get into the office without being seen? It all seemed very risky. I would have to get more information.
I walked to the Métro and went home. I hadn’t been back five minutes when Madame Blanchard turned up. How could she have the cheek to trouble her tenant at such a late hour? I hadn’t even been particularly noisy. I don’t know if the build-up of my resentment against Dunker since the morning was the reason for it, but for the first time, I allowed my anger toward my landlady to explode. Very surprised to start with, she didn’t lose her composure altogether and vehemently reminded me of the house rules. She was worse than all the others put together; nothing and no one could get the better of her!

 17
YVES DUBREUIL LET out a long, hearty laugh. Catherine, usually impassive, was holding her sides as well. I had just told them about my unsuccessful attempts at gestural synchronization with the guy in the Métro.
“I don’t see what’s so funny. I almost got beaten up because of you.” They didn’t answer, still doubled over.
“I ought to be the one making fun of you!” I said. “Your trick doesn’t
work!”
Between fits of laughter, Dubreuil repeated what the African man had
said, imitating his accent: “Ya finished taking da piss, mon?”
They broke out in uncontrollable laughter again, so contagious that in the
end I had to join them.
We were on the terrace on the garden side of the mansion, comfortably
seated in deep teak armchairs. The late afternoon sun gave a bronze color to the carved stone of the building. The stone was beginning to radiate the accumulated heat, and, along with it, the delicate perfume of the immense climbing rose that clung to the wall.
I was enjoying this moment of rest, as I was beginning to feel the exhaustion of the previous night. Three times my sleep had been interrupted to go and smoke a cigarette.
I poured myself some more orange juice, lifting with difficulty the imposing ornate crystal carafe in which ice cubes clinked together. We had eaten early, a very light Thai meal prepared by the château chef and served on a magnificently decorated table, the most astounding sight being the pyramids of spices laid out in the center of the table on silver plates.
“In fact,” said Dubreuil, who was gradually becoming serious again, “you made two mistakes, which explain your failure. First, when you are synchronizing with the other’s posture, you must respect a certain lapse of time before following his movements, so that he doesn’t feel mimicked.

 Then, and this is the crucial point, you did this like a technique that you were applying. But a technique is the last thing it is! First and foremost, it’s a frame of mind to get into, a philosophy for discovering the other. It only works if you want to enter the other’s universe, to live it from inside, putting yourself in his place to feel what he feels and see the world with his eyes. Then, if your desire is sincere, gestural synchronization is the little bit of magic that enables you to establish contact and create a quality of relationship that the other will want to preserve—which explains why he may unconsciously follow your movements. But this is only the result; it can’t be the goal.”
“Yes, but you’ll admit it’s incredible enough to make you want to experience it!”
“Of course.”
“I also tried something else, which more or less worked: creating a contact with my manager by synchronizing myself with his way of thinking. It was Luc Fausteri, who’s very cold, very rational, and doesn’t much like chatting.”
“You chose well.”
“Why do you say that?”
“If you’re going to embrace someone else’s world, you might as well
choose someone very different from you. It’s more interesting. It’s a greater voyage. By the way, did I tell you what Proust said about this?”
“Marcel Proust, the French writer? No, not that I remember.”
Dubreuil recited from memory: “The only real journey, the only Fountain of Youth, would be to travel not toward new landscapes but with new eyes, to see the universe through the eyes of another, of a hundred others, to see the hundred universes that each one of them can see, or can be.”
Catherine nodded her head in approval.
A bird landed on the edge of the table, visibly interested in the contents of the large plate of tidbits that we had barely touched. It must be strange to see the world through the eyes of a bird. Does each bird have its own unique experience, different from that of every other bird?
Dubreuil took a small salmon canapé, and the bird flew away.
“It’s not easy,” I went on, “to put yourself in the shoes of someone whose universe you don’t particularly like. That was what was hard for me with Fausteri. I’m not thrilled by numbers like he is, by the changes in our

 results or the company’s share price. I tried hard to talk about these topics, but I probably lacked conviction or sincerity. At any rate, I didn’t feel him opening up to me.”
“I can understand not liking numbers, and the idea is not to simulate an interest in the tastes or business of the other. No, the principle is to be interested in his person to the point of trying to feel the pleasure that he can find in numbers. It’s very different. So when you synchronize with his movements, when you assume his values, when you share his concerns, do it simply with the intention of slipping into his skin to live his world from inside.”
“What you mean is that I don’t have to try to be interested in numbers but just to put myself in his place by saying: ‘Hey, what’s it like? What do you feel when you’re interested in numbers?’ Is that it?”
“Exactly! And to enjoy experiencing what is, as it happens, completely new for you. And that’s where the miracle will take place on the relational level; that’s where you’ll be completely on the same wavelength.”
I reached out and took a canapé, a slice of delicately smoked salmon crowned by a hint of sour cream and a miniature asparagus spear sprinkled with lemon juice. “There is a limit, though,” I said. “It doesn’t work with everyone.”
“Yes, it does. That’s precisely the special feature of this approach.”
“If you have to be sincerely interested in the other as a person for it to function, that’s virtually impossible to do with your enemies.”
“Quite the contrary. It’s the best way to beat them! I embrace my rival the better to choke him, as the old saying goes.”
“When you hate someone or he’s making you suffer, you absolutely don’t feel like getting inside his skin to feel what he’s feeling,” I insisted.
“That’s true, and yet, it’s often the only way to understand what is causing him to behave in this way toward you. As long as you remain where you are, you limit yourself to suffering or rejecting the other, but that changes nothing about the situation. You have no influence over him. Whereas if you put yourself in his place, you can discover why he’s acting this way. If he’s a torturer, then look at the situation with his torturer’s eyes and you’ll understand what’s driving him to torture. It’s the only hope you have of making him stop. You don’t change people by rejecting them.”
“Hmm ...”

 “When you reject someone or simply his ideas, you force him to dig in his heels and stand his ground. Why should he take an interest in what you have to say if you reject his point of view?”
“You have a point.”
“If you make the effort—sometimes unpleasant—of assuming his point of view, you will grasp what is leading him to think what he thinks, to behave as he behaves. And if he feels understood and not judged, perhaps he’ll be able to hear what you have to say to try and make him change his position.”
“It can’t work every time.”
“Granted, but the opposite approach never works. Generally, the more you seek to convince someone, the more you generate resistance. The more you want him to change his opinion, the less likely he is to change it. Physicists have known this for a long time.”
“Physicists? What’s a physicist got to do with human relations?”
“It’s the law of dynamics. Isaac Newton proved that when you exercise a force of a certain strength on an object, it produces an opposite force of equal strength. Well, it’s the same for human relations. When you use energy to try and convince someone, it’s as though you were directing a force at him that applies pressure. He feels the pressure, and this makes him push in the opposite direction. Push him, he’ll push you back.”
“What’s the solution then? Because if what you say is true, the more you want to convince the less you’ll succeed. So what do you do exactly?”
“You don’t push, you pull.”
“What does that mean?”
“Pushing is starting from your position and wanting to impose it on the
other. Pulling is starting from the other’s position and gradually bringing him to you. You see, we’re still in the philosophy of synchronization. Pulling involves going into the other’s universe as well, but this time to allow him to change. The point of departure is still the same: Go and find the other where he is.”
“Push him, he’ll push you back.” I repeated Dubreuil’s formula under my breath, thinking of all the times I had really shown conviction in vain.
“Moreover, the opposite is true as well. When you try to get rid of someone who’s a nuisance, the more you push them away, the more they will stick around.”

 It reminded me of my exchanges with Madame Blanchard. The more I tried to fight against her criticism and her abusive intrusion into my private life, the more she continued. The last time, when I had gotten angry, almost shutting the door in her face, she had pushed it back open while criticizing me more vehemently than ever.
I replayed the scene for Dubreuil. He listened carefully in silence, and then I saw his eyes gleam. He had obviously just had an idea he seemed proud of.
“Do you have a solution?”
“Here’s what you’re going to do ...” He outlined his idea.
I felt myself getting paler and paler. The further he got into his
explanation, the more detailed he became about what I had to do, feeling perhaps that he had to counter my incredulity with precise directives. What he wanted of me was quite simply un-ac-cept-a-ble. I had balked at several of his tasks in the past, only to finally give in. But this was impossible. Just thinking about what he was asking of me, I could feel myself fainting.
“No, stop!” I told him. “You know I’ll never do that.”
I glanced toward Catherine, looking for support. She looked as uneasy as I did.
“You know you’ve no choice,” Dubreuil said.
“You’re not applying your own principles,” I retorted. “The more I resist, the more you’re using your position of strength.”
“That’s true.”
“And that doesn’t worry you? Do as I say, not as I do?”
“There’s a good reason for it.”
“What’s that?”
“I’ve got power, my friend. Power. So why should I worry?”
He said that with a satisfied look, smiling. He lifted his glass of white
wine to his lips; it was so cold a fine mist had formed on the glass. I took a sip of orange juice. I was annoyed with myself for having confided in him my problem with my neighbor. I led him on and then resented his imposing his solutions on me. Perhaps I was a bit of a masochist, after all.
The branches of the great cedar tree were perfectly motionless, as if they were holding their breath. The mildness of the evening enveloped us. I looked over at Catherine and suddenly froze. It was there, on her knees. She was holding it with one hand: the notebook. Perhaps she saw my eyes or

 felt my gaze unconsciously, because she covered the notebook with her other hand.
A thought went through my mind: What if I just asked to look at it? After all, there was no reason to presuppose anything. Perhaps they’d say yes. Perhaps I was getting all worked up about nothing.
I carefully assumed an air of indifference.
“I see my name’s on that notebook. Can I have a look?” I asked Catherine, holding out my hand. “I’m very curious about it.”
She stiffened, without replying, and looked at Dubreuil.
“Certainly not!” he said in a final tone of voice.
It was now or never. I would insist. “If what’s written in it concerns me,
it’s only natural I should read it.”
“Does a film director show the audience his screenplay during the
screening of the film?”
“I’m not the audience here. I’m one of the main actors, it seems to me.” “Exactly! An actor acts better when he’s told at the last minute about the
scene he’s going to act. He’s more spontaneous.”
“I’m better when I can prepare in advance.”
“The screenplay of your life is not written in advance, Alan.”
The words remained hanging in the air. Catherine looked at her feet.
I didn’t like this ambiguous reply. What did it mean? That no one can
know their destiny in advance? Or that he, Yves Dubreuil, was writing the screenplay of my life? The thought sent shivers down my spine.
My eyes turned instinctively to the house. The window to the study, on the first floor, was wide open. Underneath was a carved cornice that ran the width of the building. At the corner, there was a stone drainpipe that went down to the ground. It would be very easy to haul myself up to the cornice and from there, to get to the study window.
I took another salmon canapé.
“On the subject of power and power relationships, I went through a dreadful experience at the office,” I began.
I told them about the meeting the day before with Marc Dunker and his mental arithmetic test. Dubreuil listened carefully. I knew I risked being given another painful task, but I was ready to do anything to punish my CEO, and I needed Dubreuil’s creativity. He had Dunker’s strength, plus genius.

 “I want revenge,” I announced.
“Who are you angry with in this business?”
“It’s obvious, isn’t it?”
“Reply.”
“Who do you think?”
“I’m asking you.”
“Dunker, of course!”
He leaned slowly toward me, boring into me with his penetrating gaze. “Alan, who are you really angry with?”
I felt trapped, forced to turn my attention away from an easy answer and
look within, question my own emotions. What could be the real object of my anger if it wasn’t Dunker? Dubreuil continued to stare at me, immobile. His eyes were a mirror of my soul. I saw the answer there, suddenly obvious. I whispered: “I’m angry with myself for having given in to his hateful pressure. And for not having passed his filthy test.”
The silence in the garden seemed oppressive. It was true: I was angry with myself, angry for having allowed a deeply humiliating situation to unfold. But that didn’t stop me from being angry with Dunker as well for having been the origin of all this. I absolutely hated him.
“It’s his fault, though. It all came from him. I want revenge. By any means. It’s an obsession.”
“Ha! Vengeance, vengeance! For decades, I thought of nothing else as soon as I was crossed by anyone! How many times have I sought revenge! How many times have I rejoiced to see my adversaries suffer! How many times have I exulted as I made them pay for their deeds! And then, one day, I realized that it was all in vain, that it served no purpose and especially that I was hurting myself.”
“Hurting yourself?”
“When you meditate on revenge, you feel an energy that is admittedly very stimulating, but it is a negative, destructive energy, one that pulls you down. You don’t feel enhanced by it. And then there’s another thing. If you take revenge on someone, it’s because he has hurt you. By taking revenge, you try to hurt him back, don’t you? In the end you’re acting like him; you’re adopting his way of functioning. So he has won. He has succeeded in imposing his way of behaving on you, even if he hasn’t done it knowingly. He has forced you to join him in evil.”

 I had never thought of that. It was a rather disturbing way of looking at things. If I managed to harm Dunker, which is what I was dreaming about, it meant he had managed to rub off on me. How horrible! Even so, I wasn’t going to let myself be treated like that without saying anything.
“You know,” Dubreuil went on, “there will be a lot less wars on this earth the day men stop wanting to avenge themselves. Look at the conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians. As long as the inhabitants of each camp want to avenge the brother or cousin or uncle killed by the enemy, the war will go on, every day resulting in more dead to be avenged. It will never end until these suffering men and women are helped to come to terms not with their dead but with their vengeance.”
It was strange, almost incongruous, to talk about war in this haven of peace—the château garden, with its soothing scents, its great reassuring trees, and a calm so entrancing that it was easy to forget the nearby city. But what can seem so obvious when you’re considering other people’s conflicts takes on quite a different cast when they’re your own. The necessity for forgiveness in the Middle East seemed self-evident; forgiving Dunker was out of the question.
“You say that you hurt yourself when you try to get revenge. I accept that idea, but I have the feeling that stifling my anger would hurt me at least as much!”
“Your anger produces an energy, a force, and that force can be redirected and used to act in your own behalf, whereas revenge contributes nothing; it just destroys.”
“That’s all very well in theory, but practically speaking, what should I do?”
“First of all, you must express what’s on your mind, either by simply saying to this guy what you think of what he did, or by doing it symbolically.”
“Symbolically?”
“Yes, you can write him a letter, for example, in which you get it all off your chest and express your resentment—and then throw the letter in the Seine or burn it.”
I had the feeling I’d missed something. “What’s the point of that?”

 “It purges you of the accumulated hatred that’s hurting you. As long as you remain in a state of anger, your mind is obsessed with revenge, and that prevents you from acting in your own best interests. You’re brooding, you keep turning over your grievances, and you’re not moving forward. Your emotions are blocking you; you must free them. A symbolic act can allow that. And then you can go on to the second phase.”
“And the second phase, what’s that?”
“The second phase is using the energy of your anger to take action—for example, to achieve something you would never have dared do. Something constructive that really furthers your interests.”
The image that came to me was quite ambitious. I dreamed of changing things in my company, of becoming a force for making positive suggestions, rather than continuing to deplore the course of events and moan about it with Alice.
I would go and meet with Marc Dunker personally. His blunder the day before put him in an awkward position with me. I would take advantage of it. He would be careful not to reject my ideas outright and would be forced to listen to me. I would tell him my observations, my ideas about the company and would try to negotiate putting them to the test. After all, what did I have to lose?
A shadow passed over my enthusiasm. Why would Dunker follow the ideas of someone whose lack of self-confidence he had himself proved? Given his domineering personality, he must have nothing but contempt for me now.
I told Dubreuil about my plans and my doubts.
“It’s certain that self-confidence would greatly help you get what you want at work,” he said.
I swallowed hard.
“You promised to work on that.”
He looked at me in silence for a few moments, and then picked up a glass
of water, a stemmed crystal glass of such delicacy that it seemed almost unreal. He held it over the pyramid of saffron and slowly began to tip it.
“We are all born with the same potential for self-confidence,” he said. “Then we start hearing input from our parents, our nannies, our teachers.”
A drop of water broke off and fell on the top of the pyramid, forming a sort of lens magnifying each orange strand of the precious spice. The drop

 seemed to hesitate, then slowly made its way down the slope of the pyramid, gathering speed as it neared the bottom.
“If by misfortune,” he went on, “their input tends to be negative, criticizing, and blaming, underlining our shortcomings, mistakes, and failures, then the feeling of inadequacy and self-criticism inscribes itself on our way of thinking.”
Dubreuil tipped the glass again slowly, and a second drop fell in the same place. It, too, hesitated at the top of the cone of saffron and then followed the same path as the first. The third drop did the same, faster than the one before it. After a few seconds, a groove had formed, and each time he poured, the drops rushed down, deepening the groove a little more.
“Eventually, the slightest clumsiness makes us feel uneasy, the most unimportant failure makes us doubt ourselves, and the most trivial criticism throws us off, leaving us completely at a loss. The brain gets used to reacting negatively; the neural links get stronger with each experience.”
Clearly this described me. Everything he said spoke to me, echoed within me. So I was one of life’s sacrificial victims, abandoned by my fathers, crushed by my mother for whom I was never good enough. And now, even though I was an adult, I was still paying for a childhood I hadn’t chosen. My parents were long gone, but I was still subject to the harmful effects of their education. I was beginning to feel deeply depressed when I suddenly realized that the depression itself must contribute to making my lack of self- confidence even worse.
“Is there a way out of this vicious circle?” I asked.
“It’s not the end, actually. But it’s hard to get out of it. It requires effort.” He tipped his head to one side, and depositing another drop of water at
the summit of the pyramid, he blew on it sufficiently hard to force the drop to take another direction. It slowly made another path to the bottom.
“Above all,” he went on, “your efforts must be sustained over time, because our mind is very attached to our habits of thought, even when they make us suffer.”
He poured a new drop onto the top of the pile, and it rushed down the old groove.
“What’s needed,” he said, “is ...”
He kept on pouring drops and then blowing on them, so that they were forced to take the new route, gradually forging a groove. After a while he

 stopped blowing, and the drops rolled down the new path of their own accord.
“To create new habits in the mind,” he finished. “To dwell on thoughts that are good for self-esteem, that are associated with positive emotions, until new neural links are created, reinforcing each other and then dominating. This takes time.”
I couldn’t take my eyes off the beautiful orange pyramid, now incised with two clearly marked grooves.
“You can’t suppress the mind’s bad habits,” he said. “But it is possible to develop new mental habits and ensure that they become irresistible. You can’t change people, you know. You can just show them a path and then make them want to take it.”
I wondered how deep a groove my lack of self-confidence had incised. Would I manage one day to carve in myself a confidence, a serenity, when faced with criticism? Would I know how to develop that interior strength that makes us unassailable, since persecutors only seem to attack the most vulnerable of us?
“So, what do you suggest I do for my problem?” I asked.
Dubreuil put down the glass of water, poured some more white wine, and then calmly laid back in his armchair and took a sip.
“First of all, you should know that I am going to give you a task that you must do every day for one hundred days.”
“For one hundred days?” I squeaked.
It wasn’t the length of the task that frightened me, but the prospect of being under Dubreuil’s control for such a long time.
“Yes, one hundred days. It’s what I’ve just explained to you: You can’t create new mental habits overnight. If you carry out the task I’m going to give you for a week, it will do no good. Absolutely none. It requires a long- term commitment—repeating it for such a long time that its effects take root in you.”
“What is it?”
“It’s very simple, but it’s new for you. Every evening, you must take two minutes to think of the day that has just passed and write down three things that you have achieved and are proud of.”
“I’m not sure I accomplish that many brave deeds every day.”

 “It’s not about brave deeds. It can be really little acts, and not necessarily things you did at the office. Perhaps you took the time to help a blind man across the street, even though you were in a hurry. Perhaps you told a shopkeeper that he had made a mistake in your favor when he gave you change, or perhaps you told someone all the good things you think about them. You see, it can be absolutely anything, as long as it’s something you can be proud of. Moreover, it doesn’t have to be an action. You can be pleased with the way you reacted, with what you felt. Proud to have remained calm in situations where you would normally get worked up.”
“I see.”
I was a little disappointed. I was expecting him to give me a more important, more sophisticated task.
“But do you really think that’s going to help me develop confidence in myself? It seems so simple.”
“Ha! You can see that you’re not pure American! You can’t hide your French origins. For the French, an idea must necessarily be complex; otherwise it’s suspected of being simplistic! That’s probably why everything is so complicated in this country. People love getting worked up about things here!”
It reminded me that he had an accent I’d never been able to identify.
“To be honest,” he went on, “there is no miracle remedy that will give you confidence in yourself overnight. You must see the task I’m giving you as a little snowball. I’m pushing it from the top of the mountain, and if you go down with it for long enough, it will perhaps grow big enough to set off an avalanche of positive changes in your life.”
I was convinced of one thing: Confidence in myself was the key to my equilibrium in a lot of areas. Developing it would contribute to giving me a fulfilled life.
“This task,” he went on, “will lead you to become aware of all the things you are doing well, of all you make a success of day by day. Little by little, you will learn to direct your attention to your good qualities, your values, all that makes you a good person. The feeling of your personal worth is going to be engraved in you gradually, until it becomes a certainty. From then on, no attack, no criticism, no blame will be able to unsettle you. It won’t touch you, and you’ll even have the luxury of forgiving your aggressor and feeling compassion for him.”

 I was a long way from imagining myself feeling compassion for Marc Dunker. It was no doubt a sign of how far I still had to go.
Dubreuil got up.
“Come on. I’ll show you out. It’s getting late.”
I said good-bye to Catherine, who looked at me as if I were a laboratory
rat, and followed Dubreuil. We went around the château via the garden. The fading daylight gave it a mysterious atmosphere.
“It must be a lot of work to maintain a building and gardens of this size. I understand why you have staff.”
“Indeed, it’s difficult to do without.”
“And yet, I wouldn’t feel at home with all these people in the house. Do they stay day and night?”
“No. They all go at ten o’clock. At night I am the only person who haunts the place.”
We walked, without saying a word, to the tall black gate. An unsettling calm permeated the place. Stalin remained lying down but didn’t take his eyes off me, probably waiting for the auspicious moment to leap. I suddenly realized that behind him ranged not one but four kennels in a line.
“Do you have four dogs?” I asked.
“No, Stalin has four kennels just for him. Each day, he chooses the one he’s going to sleep in. No one but he knows which. He has a strong paranoid tendency.”
I sometimes felt as if I’d stepped into a madhouse.
I turned to Dubreuil. The light from the streetlamps made him look wan. “I’d like to know one thing, though,” I said.
“Yes?”
“You’re taking care of me, and I’m grateful, but I’d like to feel ... free.
When will you free me from my promise?”
“Freedom has to be earned!”
“Tell me when. I want to know the settlement date.”
“You’ll know when you’re ready.”
“Stop playing cat and mouse. I want to know now. After all, I’m the main
person concerned by this thing.”
“You’re not concerned, you’re involved.”
“You see, you’re still playing with words. Concerned, involved. It’s the
same thing, isn’t it?”

 “No, not at all.”
“Come on! What’s the difference, then, according to you?”
“It’s the bacon omelet.”
“What do you mean?”
“Everyone knows that in a bacon omelet, the hen is concerned and the
pig is involved.”

 Dear Sir:
18
I am writing to you to tell you of my extreme annoyance at the exercise you conducted a few days ago, in the presence of the Recruitment Department teams from your company. With all the respect I have for your position, I am nonetheless obliged to tell you of my feelings since the event: I hate you. You’re a schmuck! A big schmuck! I hate people like you. You’re a loser, a bastard, a shitty, lowlife moron.
Thank you for taking the trouble to read my letter.
Yours sincerely, Alan Greenmor

 19
NINE P.M. I OPENED the door to my apartment building, my letter in my hand. The lime trees on the street perfumed the evening air. I walked down the steps past Étienne. Propped against the wall, he was looking up at the sky with an inspired air.
“It’s mild tonight,” I said.
“It is what it is, lad.”
I walked along the curb and slipped my letter into the first open drain I
came across. “There we are: home delivery.”
I headed for the Métro, calmly walking along the streets. Montmartre has
the advantage of being situated on a hill, so that you can have the special feeling of being in Paris without being in the city. You don’t feel buried in the noise and pollution of a megalopolis whose borders you can’t even see. In Montmartre, the sky is everywhere, and you can breathe. The Butte is a village and when, at the corner of some winding street, you catch sight of the city below, it seems so distant that you feel closer to the clouds than to the hustle and bustle of Paris.
I arrived outside Dubreuil’s at 9:40 P.M. and sat down on my familiar bench. I had been coming for three nights now to stake out the mansion. I had given up lying down but had taken the precaution of putting on a knit cap that came down to my eyebrows. From a distance, it should be enough to make me unrecognizable.
I had barely sat down when the lord of the manor’s long black Mercedes appeared. It stopped outside the gate, and Vladi nimbly jumped out. He went around the car and opened the back door. I saw a young woman get out, immediately followed by Dubreuil, who put his arm around her waist. She had short, dark hair that revealed a pretty neck. A very short skirt and infinitely long legs. She had a particularly feminine walk, probably as a result of her high heels, but wasn’t she slightly ... unsteady? She hung

 around Dubreuil’s neck. I heard laughter that revealed the number of glasses she must have drunk.
They went into the yard, climbed the steps to the entrance, and disappeared into the house. Lights came on one after the other at the windows.
Nothing more happened for a good ten minutes, then I heard the vibration of the lock on the little gate, just as on the previous days. One minute past ten. My eyes were riveted to the entrance, waiting for the servants to come out. They appeared 55 seconds later. To within 20 seconds, that was the same lapse of time as on the previous nights. There was the same ritual of separation on the pavement, with a few words exchanged before the group broke up. The bus-taker crossed the avenue. The bus arrived at 10:09, a minute in advance of the official timetable. We were getting to the crucial moment: How long would it be before Dubreuil came to let Stalin out? I crossed my fingers that he would keep to the schedule of the previous days: 10:30 P.M. precisely.
I kept looking from the door to the château to my watch, each minute as it passed simultaneously reinforcing my hope and my fears. At 10:18, the light in the entrance hall came on, and my heart contracted. I waited, tensely, for the door to open. My eyes were glued to it. Nothing. Then another light appeared, in the library this time, and I began to breathe again. It was 10:21. The bus had left 12 minutes earlier. I relaxed. Nothing more happened. At 10:24, again nothing. At 10:28 and 10:30, still nothing. Now I wanted Dubreuil to appear as quickly as possible. My peace of mind for D- day depended on the regularity of his timetable for releasing Stalin. It was 10:31 P.M. when the door finally opened, and I gave a sigh of relief. For the third consecutive day, Dubreuil had released his dog to within a minute of the same time. The habit seemed firmly rooted.
I wouldn’t check the next day. It was Friday, and it was probable that things changed on the weekend. I had to stick to the weekday timetable.
I got up to go to the Métro. I walked in silence, looking at the ground, lost in thought. A brief ring on my mobile brought me out of my reverie. A text message. It was him. Even in good company, he didn’t forget me. I took out the prescribed cigarette and lit up as I walked. I would have preferred to breathe in the mild evening air. I was beginning to be fed up with having to smoke when I didn’t want to.

 I thought back over the events of the day. What could I be proud of today? Let’s see. I needed to come up with three things. Well, first of all, I was proud of having had the courage to leave the office at 6 P.M. Before, I would have felt obliged to stay till 7 like everyone else. Then let’s see, oh yes, I was proud of having given up my seat to a pregnant woman on the Métro. Finally, I was proud of the irrevocable decision I had just taken to bring to an end my incessant questioning about Dubreuil’s famous notebook: On Monday evening, in precisely 108 hours, I would know what it contained.

 20
THE FOLLOWING NIGHT was eventful. Four times, I was woken up by the order to have a cigarette. The worst was the one at 5:00 A.M. I smoked it at the window, half asleep and numb with cold, in order not to let the smell invade the apartment. It was violently disgusting. Dubreuil prescribed a cigarette some 30 times a day, and I was beginning to find smoking unbearable. I anticipated with a certain dread the text message that was going to inflict it on me. At meals, I found myself eating faster and faster, for fear of being interrupted to go and smoke. When the alarm announcing the chore went off, I immediately felt a wave of nausea, before my hand reluctantly dived into my pocket to get the cursed packet.
As it was Saturday, I slept until 11:00, catching up on my sleep deficit. Saturday had always been my favorite day, the only day off that was followed by another day off. But today was a special day. I had stage fright —a latent, underlying fear that even when I wasn’t thinking about what was causing it, continued to tie a knot in my stomach. Today was the day I had chosen to carry out the mission involving Madame Blanchard that Dubreuil had assigned. I had to get it over with and the sooner the better. In an hour, I would have already forgotten about it. So before that I had to summon up all my courage.
Finally, I got up and crossed the room barefoot to my mini stereo. I nearly removed the headphones that were permanently plugged in but then changed my mind. Above all, I didn’t want to give Madame Blanchard a valid reason for complaining. I could have dispensed with music altogether, but I felt I needed it to get me in the right frame of mind. I needed something a bit ... freaky. Let’s see, let’s see. What could I put on? No, not that, not that. There we are: a cover of My Way by the former bass player from the Sex Pistols—Frank Sinatra revised and updated via hard rock. I picked up my headphones—big headphones with earpieces that really

 covered the ears—and put them on. Sid Vicious’s deep voice sprang from the beyond, breaking into the first verse. I turned the volume up, moving with the headphone cord in my hands like a singer holding the wire of his microphone. Suddenly, the electric guitars sped up with a vengeance. I began to move in time, my bare feet slapping the floor. The singer’s voice exploded in every direction, as though he was vomiting up the song. Forget the neighbor, I thought. Turn the sound up higher. Higher. Let go. Close my eyes. Come on. Melt into the music. The music is in me, in my body. Move, vibrate, dance. All the way. Freedom from everything. Jump, feel everything.
It must have been several minutes before I realized that the drums didn’t seem to be keeping time with the song. The repeated beats must be coming from somewhere else, and in spite of the trance into which I had slipped, I knew where they were coming from.
I pulled off the headphones, my ears still throbbing, and the banging on my door started again, this time louder. She wasn’t knocking now; she was pounding.
“Monsieur Greenmor!”
The moment I had dreaded was finally here.
Push him, he’ll push you back, Dubreuil had said. And the opposite was
true as well: The more you push him away, the more he’ll insist.
“Monsieur Greenmor! Open the door!”
I remained frozen, suddenly seized by doubt. Suppose Dubreuil was
wrong?
The blows doubled in strength. How could anyone be so odious? I may
have jumped five or six times on the floor as I danced. She couldn’t have heard much in her apartment. She really wanted to ruin my life. What a horrid woman!
Anger pushed me to act. I tore off my pullover, then my T-shirt. Now I was bare-chested, bare-footed, in jeans.
“Monsieur Greenmor, I know you’re there!”
I started to walk to the door and then stopped. I felt my heart beating faster. Come on. I unzipped my jeans and let them slide to the floor. Dubreuil was really a madman ...
“Open that door!”

 Her voice was full of hate. I took the few steps that separated me from the door. I had massive stage fright.
Now.
Holding my breath, I slid down my boxers, stepped out of them, and threw them across the room. It was horrible being naked in such circumstances.
“I know you can hear me, Monsieur Greenmor!”
Courage.
I reached for the door handle. I couldn’t believe what I was doing. I was
no longer quite myself.
She gave three final knocks as I turned the handle. I had the feeling I was
working my own guillotine. I pulled the door toward me, and, as soon as it was half-open, I felt a cool draft, as if to remind me I was naked. Torture.
The sentence. I must say the sentence. With enthusiasm. Go on, it’s too late to back out.
I opened the door wide.
“Madame Blanchard! How lovely to see you!”
Clearly, she got the shock of her life. She must have been pushing against
my door to be able to hit it with such force, because when it opened, she nearly lost her balance. She jerked back with a start and then froze, her eyes bulging, her face flushing violently. Her mouth opened, but no noise came out.
“Come on in!” I said cheerily.
She remained rooted to the spot, her mouth still agape, staring at my nakedness, unable to say a word.
It was dreadful finding myself naked in front of my old neighbor, but I was encouraged by her reaction. It almost made me want to lay it on even thicker.
“Come on, I’m sure you’d like to have something to drink with me,” I cajoled.
“I ... I ... no ... I ... Mon ... Mon ... Monsieur ... I ... but ... I ...”
It was as if she had turned to stone, as she mumbled incomprehensibly, her eyes riveted to my penis. It took her several minutes to come back to her senses, then stammer an excuse and back away.
She never came to complain about the noise again.

 21
SUNDAY, 6:00 A.M. The ringing brought me out of a deep sleep. There’s nothing more annoying than being woken in the middle of a dream. An immense weariness came over me. It was the third text message that night. I could take no more. I didn’t even have the strength to get up. I remained lying down for a long time, forcing myself to keep my eyes open, fighting not to go back to sleep. What a nightmare!
I had immense trouble sitting up. I could no longer bear having to smoke at all hours of the day and night. It was a real ordeal. Annoyed, I reached out and pulled a cigarette from the pack on the bedside table. I couldn’t face getting up to go to the window. Never mind the smell. I’d roll up the butt and ashes in a handkerchief so I wouldn’t smell the foul stench of stale tobacco as I went back to sleep.
I grabbed my box of matches—a small box, decorated with a drawing of the Eiffel Tower. The first match broke in two in my numb fingers. The second one burst into flame with the characteristic sulfur smell. This was my only moment of pleasure before the dreaded chore. I brought the match to my cigarette. As the flame licked the end of it, I inhaled. The smoke invaded my mouth, attacking my palate, my tongue, and my throat, spreading its strong, acrid taste. I exhaled. My mouth felt like it was coated. Revolting.
I inhaled a second time. The smoke burned my throat, inflamed my lungs. I coughed, a dry cough that made the foul taste on my tongue worse. I wanted to cry. I couldn’t carry on like this. It just wasn’t possible. It was more than I could take. Stop. Have pity.
Frantic, I looked around for something that could give some relief and finally caught sight of the guilty messenger: my mobile phone. Dubreuil’s text messages. Dubreuil! I nervously reached out and grabbed the phone. Pressing the keys, I scrolled through the record of messages received. My

 eyes were stinging, and I had difficulty reading. Finally I found the number the messages were coming from. I hesitated a few seconds, and then pressed the Send key. With a beating heart, I lifted the phone to my ear and waited. A silence, then a ring tone. Two rings. Three rings. Someone answered.
“Hello.”
Dubreuil’s voice.
“It’s me, Alan.”
“I know.”
“I can’t take any more. Stop sending me text messages all the time. I’m
... I’m at a breaking point.”
Silence. No answer.
“I beg you, let me stop. I don’t want to smoke anymore, do you hear? I
can’t bear your cigarettes any longer. Let me stop!”
Silence again. Did he even understand the state I was in?
“I beg you.”
He broke the silence in a very calm voice. “Agreed. If that’s what you
want, then you’re free to stop smoking.”
He hung up before I had the time to say thank you.
It was with a heart full of elation that I put the cigarette out, stubbing it
directly on the bedside table, the last cigarette of my life.

 22
DUBREUIL REFUSED TO help me prepare for my planned interview with Marc Dunker. “I don’t know your company, so how can I advise you what to say?” he told me when I asked. Finally, giving in to my insistence, he had offered me some tips.
“What’s difficult about it for you?” he asked.
“He’s shifty, he’s dishonest, and he’s always ready to make unjustified criticisms. As soon as you ask him something, or point to some malfunction, he tends to attack so he doesn’t have to reply.”
“I see. And what do you and your colleagues do when he criticizes?”
“We defend ourselves. We try to prove that he’s wrong, that the criticisms are unfair.”
“So you try to justify yourselves, is that right?” “Yes, of course.”
“So you’re the ones who do all the work!”
“I don’t understand.”
“Faced with unwarranted criticism, you absolutely mustn’t justify yourself; otherwise you’re playing his game!”
“Perhaps, but what else can I do?” “Torture him.”
“Very funny.”
“I’m not joking.”
“You’re forgetting one little detail.”
“What’s that?”
“I don’t want to lose my job.”
“Be like the inquisitors in the Middle Ages. What did they call the
unbearable torture they were about to inflict on someone?” “I don’t know.”
“We’re going to put him to the question.”

 “Put him to the question?”
“Yes.”
“And what’s the connection with my boss?”
“Faced with unfounded criticism, torture him by asking him questions.” “What do you mean exactly?”
“Rather than justifying yourself, ask him questions to make him justify
himself! And don’t let go. It’s for him to provide proof of his criticisms, not for you to prove they’re unfounded! In other words, make him sweat.”
“I see.”
“Push him into a corner. Ask him what right he has to assert what he’s saying, and don’t let him hide behind generalities. Ferret away, demanding details, facts. If he’s dishonest, he’ll have a hard time. And you know what? The best thing about all this is that you don’t even have to be aggressive. If you set about it carefully, you can bring him to his knees with great gentleness, in an apparently very respectful tone of voice. In short, you’ll force him to justify his criticisms while being above criticism yourself. And if you set about it carefully, there’s every chance he’ll never bug you again.”
I phoned Marc Dunker’s office and made an appointment with his secretary. Dunker’s secretary was male, a rarity in the business world. He was a very distinguished young Englishman named Andrew. His hiring had surprised everyone. Dunker clearly being the macho type, we would have imagined him going for a nymphet in a miniskirt and low-cut top, who would be at his beck and call, reassuring him of his superiority as a dominant male.
But no doubt Dunker’s choice was not random. I suspected him of having a secret complex about his humble origins. The English secretary, who went with him everywhere, compensated for Dunker’s lack of polish with his extreme elegance, courtesy, and—the icing on the cake—his refined French, spoken with a very British accent. With all the classiness of Her Majesty’s subject, Andrew by his mere presence ennobled his boss. The odd mistake in the gender of nouns only added a touch of charm.
That morning, I deliberately arrived five minutes late, just enough to send Dunker the message that I wasn’t his puppet. Andrew greeted me.

 “I’m going to have to ask you to be patient for a little while,” he said. “Monsieur Dunker isn’t ready to see you yet.”
Of course. He was responding to my lateness by being even later. In France, time is an instrument of power.
Andrew invited me to have a seat on a red leather sofa. It stood in marked contrast to the perfectly white walls. One end of the spacious room was a waiting area for visitors; the other was Andrew’s office. Furnished in red leather that matched the sofa, the office was impeccably tidy.
“Would you like a coffee?” Andrew asked.
I was surprised by his question. Somehow I imagined that someone straight out of Buckingham Palace would offer me tea in a china cup.
He placed the coffee on the low table in front of me, then went back to his desk and became absorbed in reading a file. From time to time, he picked up a black lacquer pen and noted something in the margin, then put the pen down in exactly the same place, perfectly aligned with the edge of the desk.
Finally, Dunker’s office door flew open as if a SWAT team was bursting in, and the CEO propelled himself into the middle of the room.
“Who wrote this report?” he shouted in an accusing tone.
“It was Alice, sir,” Andrew replied evenly.
“It’s unbelievable!” stormed Dunker. “She makes mistakes bigger than
her ass! Tell her to reread her notes before giving me this sort of crap!”
He threw down the document, scattering its pages all over his secretary’s
desk. Andrew gathered them neatly into a pile.
I swallowed hard.
Dunker turned toward me and held out his hand, suddenly calm and
smiling. “Hello, Alan.”
I followed him into his office, a vast space dominated by an imposing
triangular desk positioned with a point turned toward the visitor. Dunker sat down behind it and waved me to a stylish but very uncomfortable armchair facing him.
Though the window was open, the noise from the street below seemed distant, as if it was not allowed to penetrate the top floor of the building. Looking out, I could see the tip of the Obélisque on the Place de la Concorde, and beyond that the top of the Arc de Triomphe.
“It’s a lovely view, isn’t it?” Dunker said, seeing my gaze lingering outside.
“Yes, it’s lovely. But it’s a shame the Avenue de l’Opéra has no trees,” I said to break the ice. “It would smell nice, having some greenery under your windows.”
“It’s the only avenue in Paris without any trees,” Dunker said. “Do you know why?”
I didn’t.
“When Haussmann built it at Napoleon the Third’s request, he gave in to the Opéra’s architect who didn’t want anything to intrude on the view of his work from the Tuileries Palace.”
A fly came through the window and buzzed around us.
“You wanted to see me,” Dunker said. “What can I do for you?”
“I wanted to tell you about a certain number of things we could improve
in the company.”
He frowned imperceptibly.
“Improve?”
My strategy to convince him was to embrace his world by synchronizing
with his values of efficiency and profitability. He was always talking about them. All his decisions boiled down to them. I was going to try to prove to him that my requests went along with his priorities.
“Yes,” I continued, “for the well-being of all, and with a view to increasing the firm’s profitability.”
“The two rarely go together,” Dunker said, affecting a slightly amused air.
“Unless an employee who feels better works better,” I countered.
The fly landed on his desk. He flicked it away with the back of his hand. “If you don’t feel happy with us, Alan ...”
“I didn’t say that.”
“Don’t get excited.”
“I’m not getting excited,” I said, trying to appear as calm as possible,
despite already wanting to push him out the window. What if he was deliberately misunderstanding what I said, just to throw me off? Stop replying. Torture him with questions. Questions.
“Besides,” I went on, “what’s the link between my opinion that an employee who feels better works better and your hypothesis that I don’t feel
 happy in your company?”
Three seconds of silence.
“It’s obvious, isn’t it?”
“No. What do you mean?” I asked.
“Well, bad results can’t be excused by external causes,” said Dunker. “Yet my ...” Don’t justify yourself. Ask questions, calmly.
“Who has bad results?” I asked innocently.
An expression of annoyance crossed his face. The fly landed on his pen. He brushed it away again, then changed the subject.
“So tell me: What are your ideas about things that could be improved?”
I had just won the first round.
“Well, first of all, I think we should take on a second assistant in our
department, to help Vanessa. She is constantly overstretched, and you can tell she’s really under stress. The new assistant could type up our reports for us. I’ve calculated that we consultants spend almost twenty percent of our time typing up reports on our interviews. Given our hourly rate, that’s not at all profitable for the firm. If we had a second assistant, she could take down in shorthand what we want to put in our reports and then type them up. We could use the time gained to do really useful things that we alone can do.”
“No, each consultant must type up his notes. It’s the rule.”
“It’s precisely that rule that I’m calling into question.”
“When you’re well organized, it doesn’t take all that much time.”
“But it’s logical that clerical work should be done by the person whose
hourly pay is the lowest. It’s better for a consultant to spend his time on activities that are more profitable for the company.”
“Exactly. The appointment of an additional member of the department would bring down the department’s profitability,” Dunker said.
“On the contrary, I ...” Stop arguing. Ask questions.
“How would it bring down the profitability?”
“It would increase the overall salary expenditure for the department, of
course.”
“But since the consultants would free up time to look after customers and
do more canvassing for new clients, it would increase turnover. In the end, we’d be winners.”
“I don’t think it would increase turnover.” “What makes you think that?”

 “Everyone knows that the less work you have to do, the less work you do,” Dunker said.
Ask questions. Gently ...
“Everybody? Who exactly?”
He searched for words for a few seconds, his eyes moving from left to right. “At any rate, I know.”
“How do you know that?” I pressed him.
The fly landed on his nose. He batted it away, with a gesture of profound annoyance. “That’s what always happens, of course!”
“Oh, you’ve already experienced this?” I asked.
“Yes ... well ... no, but I know what happens.”
So that he couldn’t blame me for being aggressive in any way, I made
sure to seem very naïve, almost the village idiot.
“How can you know, if you haven’t experienced it?”
Unless it was imagination, those were beads of sweat on his forehead. At
any rate, he couldn’t come up with a satisfactory answer.
“Does that mean,” I went on, “that if you had less work to do, you’d start
to do less and less?”
“I’m different,” he exploded, before getting a grip on himself. “Look,
Alan, I’m beginning to find you rather arrogant!”
There we were at last. I took my time.
“Arrogant,” I mused, settling myself calmly in my armchair. “But the
other day, you demonstrated in front of everyone that I was lacking in self- confidence.”
He froze. A cloud passed over the sun, and the office suddenly went darker. In the distance, an ambulance was speeding by, its siren screaming.
Finally, Dunker had a flash of inspiration. “Look, Greenmor, let’s get back to the subject. Concerning your request for reorganization: Let the department meet its targets, and then we’ll talk again about appointing an assistant!”
“Yes, of course, of course,” I replied. “But suppose that appointment is the thing that would allow us to meet our targets?”
“You’re taking a very limited view of the problem,” he said, his tone condescending. “I’ve got a strategic view of the company’s development. And that vision prohibits me from increasing the budget for wages. You

 don’t have all the information to make a judgment, so you can’t understand.”
“Indeed, it’s difficult for me to take a position on the company’s strategic development, since the employees don’t really know what it is. But you know, I’m a great believer in common sense. And it seems to me that every business needs the means to develop. Isn’t that essential?”
“You’re forgetting something, Alan. Something major. Our business is listed on the stock exchange. The markets are watching us. We can’t do just anything.”
“Taking on staff to allow us to expand—is that just anything?”
The fly was buzzing around us. Dunker grabbed a glass of water on the desk and poured its contents into a potted plant, keeping the empty glass in his hand.
“The market can only predict the future by examining present results,” he said. “Investors won’t wait to see if appointments produce a positive effect in the long term. If we pay more wages, the share will drop in price. It’s automatic. We are under the looking glass. He’s watching,” he said, pointing to a newspaper clipping. It showed a photo of Fisherman, the journalist who was Dunker’s bête noire. The headline on the article referred to our shares: “Potential, But Must Do Better.”
The fly landed on the desk. In one swift movement, Dunker turned the glass over and dropped it over the fly. A sadistic little smile crossed his face.
“It seems as if we’re really slaves to the share price,” I said. “But what does it matter to the company if the share price goes up or down? We couldn’t care less, could we?”
“You can say that because you don’t own any shares!” Dunker snapped.
I pressed on. “But what matters, even for you shareholders, is that the price goes up in the end. If the business grows, the share price will necessarily go up sooner or later.”
“Yes, but you can’t allow the share price to go down, even if it’s only over the short term.”
“Why?”
“Because it puts us at risk of a takeover. You ought to know. You studied economics, didn’t you? Only a high share price protects you from a takeover bid by another company, because if the price is high, it would cost

 too much to acquire the number of shares needed to gain a controlling interest in our firm. That’s why it’s vital to have a share price that constantly goes up—and goes up faster than that of our competitors.”
“If there is the risk of a takeover, why go public?”
“To develop fast,” Dunker said. “As you know, when a company goes public, it immediately gets the money of all the people who want to buy in. That finances projects.”
“Yes, but if it then prevents you from making decisions that allow the company to develop, just because you have to keep the share price going up, then the result will be the opposite of what you want.”
“Those are simply constraints that have to be managed,” he said.
“But we’re not free anymore!” I protested. “Fausteri was saying that we couldn’t open the Brussels office this year because last year’s profits had to be distributed as a dividend to the shareholders, and we didn’t want to reduce the results of the year to come.”
“Yes, but distribution of dividends isn’t linked to the share price. It’s just a demand from our shareholders. Dividends are the return from their investment in the company.”
“But we could reinvest this year’s profits in our development and and then make profits again next year, couldn’t we?”
“We have two large groups of shareholders who demand that we make a profit of twelve percent each year and that we pay most of it to them as dividends.”
“Yes, I know. But if their demand for a dividend prevents the growth of the business they’ve invested in, surely they can be patient for a year or two, can’t they?”
“No,” said Dunker, “our difficulties are none of their business. They’ve invested in our company but not necessarily for the long term. They want a rapid return on their investment, and that’s their right.”
“But if that forces us to make decisions that are harmful to us ...”
“That’s the way it is,” said Dunker. “We have no choice. The real bosses are the shareholders.”
“If their goal is solely financial and short-term, with the intention of selling their shares before long, it makes a mockery of the company’s destiny over time.”
“That’s part of the game.”

 “A game? But it isn’t a game,” I protested. “It’s reality! There are real people working here! Their lives and their families’ lives depend in part on the health of this company. You call that a game?”
Dunker shrugged. “What can I say?”
“So, let me get this straight: Not only are we slaves to the share price but we’re subject to the absurd demands of shareholders who won’t even be shareholders for long. Doesn’t it all feel a little upside down? I really can’t see the advantage of the stock exchange flotation. You could have developed the company without it, just by each year reinvesting the profits from the year before.”
“Yes, but we wouldn’t grow as quickly,” Dunker said.
I remained perplexed, never having grasped our culture’s obsession with speed. Why always going faster? Where does it lead? People in a hurry are already dead.
“What’s the point in developing quickly?” I asked him.
“You have to establish yourself quickly and dominate the market before your competitors can take up a long-term position.”
“Because if you don’t?”
“If you don’t, it will be harder to take market share from them so we can increase our turnover.”
“But if healthy, slow development improves the quality of what we’re offering—our services—that will bring in new customers, won’t it?”
Silence. Had Dunker never asked himself that question?
“It would be slower,” was all he said.
“Where’s the problem with that? What’s to stop us from taking time to do
the job well?”
He rolled his eyes. “Speaking of time, Alan, you’re taking up mine at the
moment. I haven’t got time to spend philosophizing.”
He started rearranging the files on his desk, no longer paying attention to
me.
“It seems to me,” I said, searching for my words, “that it’s always useful
to step back a bit. To ask questions about the meaning of our actions.” Dunker looked up. “The meaning?”
“Yes, why we do what we do, what the point is.”
The fly was buzzing around in its bell jar.

 “You mustn’t look for meaning where there isn’t any,” he said dismissively. “You think that life has a meaning? The strongest and the cleverest win, that’s all. They get the power and the money. And when you’ve got power and money, you can have anything you want in life. It’s no more complicated than that, Greenmor. The rest is intellectual masturbation.”
I looked at him pensively. How could he believe for a single second that being rich and powerful was enough for a successful life? Who could lie to himself enough to believe he was happy just because he was driving a Porsche?
“Poor Alan,” he went on. “You’ll probably never know just how great a feeling power is!”
His words left me feeling as though I was from another planet. They almost made me curious to find out. Besides, hadn’t Dubreuil told me to get inside the skin of people to try and understand what they’re feeling?
“When you do all this, you feel powerful?” I asked him.
“Yes.”
“And if you didn’t, then you’d feel ... ?”
Dunker blushed. I wanted to burst out laughing, although I hadn’t
embarrassed him on purpose. But now my imagination was running a film of a businessman busying himself with his work to compensate for his sexual inadequacies.
“As far as the assistant is concerned,” Dunker said, “the answer is no. Did you have other requests?”
I presented my other ideas, but none got his okay. I wasn’t surprised, now that I understood how he worked and what the rules of his game were. All the same, I had one last request—for an explanation. “I’ve noticed that our firm is running a lot more ads in the press.”
“Yes, that’s right,” he said, visibly pleased with himself.
“But I’m not being given any more cases at the moment. Why’s that?” “Trust me, I can guarantee you’re not being treated any differently than
your colleagues. The work is being distributed fairly. Alan, I really must end this now. I have work to do.”
He underlined his words by picking up a file on the desk. I didn’t budge.
“But if the advertising is working, how can it be that I haven’t got more recruitment cases to work on? It’s not logical.”

 “Oh, Alan, you always want to understand everything. You must realize that in a business the size of ours, there are some decisions you don’t shout from the rooftops. In this case, placing ads doesn’t necessarily mean that there are real vacancies to be filled.”
“You mean we’re placing false ads? False job openings?”
“False, false, big words!”
“But why?”
“Really, you’re totally lacking in strategic vision, Greenmor. I’ve been
explaining to you for the last hour why it’s vital for the share price to go up day by day. You ought to know that the market doesn’t react just to objective results! There’s also an element of psychology, believe it or not. And seeing Dunker Consulting job openings in the papers is good for investors’ morale.”
I couldn’t believe what I was hearing.
“But that’s dishonest!”
“We have to have an edge.”
“You publish false ads just to take care of the company’s image and make
the share price go up? What about the candidates?”
“It makes absolutely no difference to them!”
“But they take the time to send their resumés, to fill out the application.” He sighed by way of a reply.
I went on. “You’re not taking into consideration that the more they send
applications that don’t get anywhere, the more their morale and self- confidence will drop!”
Dunker rolled his eyes. “Alan, have you ever considered going to work for a charity for the unemployed?”
I just stood there dumbstruck, flabbergasted by all I had just heard. How could anyone could be so uninterested in other people’s lives, even if they were strangers?
Finally, I got up and turned to go. Clearly, I wasn’t going to get anything from him. His decisions obeyed a skewed logic that left no place for ideas based on a sincere desire to improve things.
I took two steps and then stopped. It seemed inconceivable that anyone could be satisfied with a vision of life as empty of meaning as the one Dunker had just described. I wanted to be quite clear about it.

 “Monsieur Dunker, does all this ... does it really make you a happy man?”
A strange expression crossed his face, but he didn’t answer, still staring at his document. Perhaps it was the first time in his life that anyone had asked him that. I looked at him with curiosity and even a certain pity, then silently crossed the room, the thick carpet absorbing the sound of my steps. As I turned to close the door behind me, Dunker was still staring at the file on his desk and had probably already forgotten me. But he had the same strange expression on his face, as if he were lost in thought. Then slowly he moved his hand over to the glass and lifted it.
The fly immediately flew off and escaped through the window.

 23
THAT EVENING, I took the bus to the château. I was of two minds: on the one hand, the strong desire to discover at last the contents of Dubreuil’s notebook, which I was convinced would tell me more about his motives; on the other, the fear of breaking into a place at night that had daunting security even in daytime and being caught red-handed.
The bus was far from empty, despite the late hour. There was a little old lady sitting on my right and a man with a moustache in the seat opposite me. I deposited at my feet a plastic bag containing an enormous leg of lamb I had bought at the local butcher’s. After a few minutes, the warm air inside the bus began to smell of raw meat. The odor, subtle at first, grew more pronounced, then frankly revolting. The little old lady began giving me sidelong glances, then turned away very conspicuously. The man with the moustache started staring at me with a look of disgust. I almost got up and changed seats, then thought again. The leg of lamb was today’s Closer. I had to stop worrying about the way other people saw me. After all, I told myself, life is extraordinary; at every moment, it gives us opportunities to grow.
So I stayed in my place, doing my best to relax and ignore the feeling of shame that had insinuated itself inside me. I was very proud of my decision, reminding myself that each day I had to write down three things I could feel good about. Let’s see, let’s see ... what could I put down today? My interview with Dunker, of course! Admittedly, I hadn’t gotten anywhere, but I had had the courage to go and confront him, and I had managed not to justify myself under attack. It even seemed as if the questioning tactic suggested by Dubreuil had rattled Dunker somewhat. That was something to be proud of.
Now the man with the moustache was eyeing my plastic bag suspiciously, no doubt trying to guess its contents. Perhaps he thought I was

 carting body parts around Paris.
I got off at the stop before the château, in order to cover the last few
hundred yards on foot. The bus set off again at once, the noise of its engine receding with it, and the neighborhood was quiet again. As I walked, I concentrated on my future mission, going over the sequence of events, minute by minute.
9:38 P.M.: Stage 1 would start in 22 minutes. I was dressed in dark sports clothes, to be free to move and go unnoticed in the night.
As I got closer to the mansion, I began to feel mounting apprehension, and a little chink opened up for doubt. Was I right to want to read the notebook at any price? Wasn’t it sheer madness to try such an expedition? Fear of getting caught was eating at me, but it was dominated by an even bigger fear, more worrying still: Dubreuil was hiding something from me. I was sure of it. Otherwise, why was he leaving everything so vague, when he was normally so frank? Why not answer my questions? I had to know for my peace of mind—my safety even.
I arrived at 13 minutes before the key moment. I sat down on the bench on the other side of the avenue, my plastic bag next to me. The area was deserted. In the heart of summer, most of its inhabitants were far away on vacation, no doubt. I was trying hard to take deep breaths to relax.
The façade of the mansion was dark. The weak light from the nearest streetlight gave it a gloomy air. A haunted castle. Only the windows of the great drawing room were lit up.
At 9:52, I got up. Eight minutes to go. With a knot in my stomach, I started crossing the avenue diagonally, taking my time. I needed to stay close to the door, without seeming to be on the lookout if a neighbor saw me.
9:58 P.M.: It would be soon now. I walked past the gate, then stopped, pretending to tie my shoelaces, and then turned around. 10:00 P.M. Nothing. I was beginning to count the seconds when the electric lock sounded. My heart began to beat faster as I picked up the pace, looking around to make sure I was alone. Less than ten seconds later, I was outside the black door. I took out the little metal plate I had bought the day before and pushed the door. It opened. Bending down, I put the metal piece on the ground, propped against the doorframe. I released the door and anxiously watched as it slowly closed. It hit my rectangle, the two metals knocking

 together with a characteristic ping that seemed close enough to the normal sound the door made when it closed. I pushed the door again, and to my great relief, it opened. The metal plate was just thick enough to stop it from closing all the way and locking. I released the door and took a few steps back, then crossed the avenue again. I hadn’t reached my bench when I could hear voices coming from the steps outside the front door. The servants were leaving the house. They didn’t seem to notice anything out of the ordinary. They came out into the street and separated, one heading as usual for the bus stop. 10:06 P.M. For the time being, everything was going perfectly. The bus was due in four minutes.
A lady with a little dog on a leash appeared on the sidewalk across the street. At a distance, I could see the end of her cigarette weaving circles in the darkness. Her companion, a wheezy Pekinese, followed her very slowly, stopping every few inches to sniff something, his long hair sweeping the ground. Every time he stopped, the woman took a drag on her cigarette and waited patiently for the dog to finish delighting in the smell it had detected.
10:09 P.M. The bus was due any second, but the dog walker would prevent me from entering the grounds. Rotten luck. The only person in the area had to walk right to the spot where I needed to be alone. She was now in front of the mansion gate. She seemed to be growing impatient with the dog’s dallying and gently tugged on the leash. The Pekinese, far from obeying his mistress’s wishes, pulled against the leash, his grumpy little head sinking into his shoulders as he refused to move. The mistress gave in and took another drag on her cigarette.
10:11 P.M.: The bus was late. The servant was still waiting. So was I. But even if the bus arrived now, it would take at least five minutes for the lady with the little dog to move away. I wouldn’t have enough time left. I was going to have to postpone my mission.
I was thinking my leg of lamb would smell even worse the next day when I recognized the humming of a motor. As the bus stopped, a miracle happened. The lady picked up the dog and started running for the bus. The peke’s head nodded like those plastic bobblehead dogs that people used to put on the back shelves of their cars in the 1970s. The woman made it to the bus in time and got on. The doors closed behind her, and the bus pulled away.

 Now I had a choice, but I had to decide right away. It was 10:13 P.M. Dubreuil would release his hound in 17 minutes. I ought to have enough time.
I leapt up and crossed the avenue. I paused briefly outside the door, my senses alert, then pushed it open and slipped inside. At once, Stalin stood up and ran toward me, barking. I took up a position slightly beyond the point where I knew his chain would grow taut and reached inside the plastic bag. My fingers slipped as I tried to get hold of the raw meat. I finally managed to grab the leg of lamb and get it out of the bag, brandishing it like an enormous club. I crouched down as a sign of peace and held the meat out to Stalin. Instantly, he stopped barking and closed his mouth over the leg, his fangs sinking into the flesh. I had figured he would accept this irresistible bribe; even dogs are corruptible. I crumpled up the bag and stuffed it in my pocket, then wiped my greasy hand on my trousers.
I couldn’t walk close to the building without risking being seen as I passed in front of the drawing room windows. So I dodged behind the bushes bordering the garden and ran around to the back of the house at top speed. As I arrived, out of breath, an unpleasant surprise awaited me: All the first floor windows were shut, despite the mildness of the evening and the heat that had no doubt built up inside. Only a few of the windows on the ground floor were open, including the one in the entrance hall. It was a lot riskier. 10:19 P.M. Only 11 minutes left. It was still worth a try.
I emerged from the shrubbery and raced across the garden to the house, my heart beating. As I got close, I could hear music. Dubreuil was listening to Rachmaninoff’s Piano Sonata no. 1. He had turned it up loud. Luck was with me again.
I paused to catch my breath and then, my stomach in a knot, slipped inside the window.
A heady perfume, a woman’s perfume, entrancing, floated in the air. The lord of the manor was not alone tonight.
The piano sounded loud, even as far away as the entrance hall. The monumental chandelier had been switched off, but the prisms reflected narrow rays of light in every direction. I realized the door to the drawing room must be open because a beam of light shot across the marble floor in a wide yellow band. There was a high risk I would be seen passing the

 drawing room to get to the staircase. Was I going to have to give up so close to the goal, after going to all this trouble?
At that moment, an astonishing thing happened: a wrong note followed by a curse in a foreign language. Dubreuil’s voice. Two seconds later, the music started again. It wasn’t a recording; he was playing the piano! It was an unhoped-for break.
The perfume ...
There remained his probable guest, who might see me crossing the hall. Yet, if Dubreuil was playing for a woman, there was a good chance she was looking at him.
It was a risk to be taken.
I took it without really thinking, obeying instinct and perhaps also under the influence of the enchanting perfume, which made me burn with desire to see the person wearing it.
I felt my way toward the staircase, each step bringing me closer to the open door that was as threatening as it was alluring. Rachmaninoff’s tormented music, tumultuous, deafening, filled the space, forcing itself deep inside me. With each step, I could see into more of the drawing room. My pulse accelerated in time with the wild chords issuing from the piano.
I crept forward, staying in the shadows. From where I stood, I could see that the drawing room was a vast space with high ceilings and Persian rugs on the floor. Everything was enormous: red velvet sofas, settees as deep as beds, gilt consoles with extravagantly carved legs, tall baroque mirrors. On every surface there seemed to be candlesticks with immense candles. As I took another step forward, peering deeper into the room, I could see the light from the flickering flames dancing on the black surface of the piano.
Dubreuil, wearing a dark suit, was seated at the piano with his back to me. I watched his hands moving up and down the keyboard as the Rachmaninoff sonata rang out. And there in front of him, stretched out across the top of the immense grand piano, was a woman with long blond hair ... entirely naked. She was propped up on one elbow with her head resting on the palm of her hand, looking at the pianist with a detached air. I couldn’t tear my eyes away from her grace, her beauty, her refinement, her extreme femininity.
Time stood still, and it took me a while to realize that the woman was looking straight at me. Alarmed, I was overcome by the situation, at once

terrified at having been spotted and fascinated by those eyes that had taken possession of mine and wouldn’t release them. I stood there, like a statue, looking at her, unable to move.
Having done everything in order not to be seen, having put on dark clothes to disappear into the night, here I was being looked at with an intensity unlike any I had ever before experienced. She was in no way embarrassed by her nudity in the presence of a stranger; quite the opposite. Displaying a disturbing composure, she fixed me with eyes tinged with defiance. I would have given all I possessed just to smell her perfume on her skin.
While Dubreuil’s fingers continued their wild adventures on the keys, filling the house with sound, I had the feeling, then the conviction, that the woman wouldn’t betray me. Even though she seemed rooted to the present, fully inhabiting her body, at the same time I felt her to be completely detached from whatever might transpire.
Struggling terribly with myself, I finally stepped back slowly, very slowly, until no doubt judging herself beaten, she looked away.
I silently climbed the great staircase, her image fixed in my mind. Gradually coming back to my senses, I glanced at my watch. 10:24 P.M.! There was a risk Stalin would be let loose in six minutes.
I went along the corridor, plunged in semidarkness, as quickly as the need to remain silent allowed. The unlit chandeliers cast their weak reflection on the walls, outlining dismal shapes on the tapestries.
Another wrong note, followed by another curse, and the music started again. The office! I opened the door and slipped inside, my heart in my mouth.
I immediately saw the notebook, lying next to the threatening paper knife with its tip turned toward the visitor. I leapt toward it, my heart pounding. Only four minutes left. It was sheer madness.
I grabbed the notebook and going over to the window to take advantage of the weak moonlight, opened it in the middle, quite randomly. The notebook was in the form of a diary, handwritten, each new paragraph beginning with a date emphatically underlined. I hastily scanned bits here and there, frustrated at not being able to read it all.
Each paragraph was stuffed with comments about me and my personality. I felt like a laboratory animal under the microscope of some research scientist.
I flipped back to an earlier page. Suddenly my heart was in my mouth.
16 July—Alan hurriedly left the taxi in the middle of the road, slamming the door, a sign that he probably successfully carried out the prescribed mismatching task.
So I was being followed. My intuition was well-founded. But then the idea made me shudder. Perhaps he knew I was here now?
I rapidly scanned more pages. Suddenly, I became aware that the music had stopped playing. The house was now plunged into frightening silence.
One last time, I thumbed through 10 or 12 pages, still going backward in time. What my eyes saw next was a shock to my system. I had met Yves Dubreuil for the first time the day of my attempted suicide at the Eiffel Tower. The date was unforgettable because it was so painful, charged with anxiety and shame: June 27.
The paragraph before my eyes was dated June 11.
  
 24
I WAS STILL transfixed, the notebook in my hand, when I heard a slight creaking behind me. I turned around and, overcome with fright, saw the door handle move. Leaving the notebook on the desk, I slipped behind the thick curtains, afraid that this had all been a waste of time, that my presence here was already known.
Despite its thickness, the drapery material was loosely woven, so I could see through it, which made me afraid that I could be seen.
The door opened partway and a face looked in, peering into the darkness. It was the young woman. My heart was in my mouth. What she saw must have corresponded to what she expected, because she opened the door wide and came in, quite naked, her bare feet sinking into the thick carpet.
She came straight toward me, and I held my breath. She stopped in front of the desk, and I started breathing again, half-relieved, half-disappointed. Her eyes were searching the darkness, looking for something. I was less than a yard away. She leaned over the desk, her breasts rippling delightfully, and reached out toward the notebook. Her perfume enveloped me in its sensuality, making me melt with desire. I only had to reach out to caress her skin, to lean forward to place my lips on it.
She pushed the notebook aside and leaned over farther toward a rectangular box. She opened it and took out an enormous cigar. She left the box open and, to my great regret, went straight back toward the door, her delicate fingers closed around the cigar she was taking back to the master of the house.
I waited 20 seconds before moving. 10:29 P.M. Suppose Dubreuil had taken advantage of the young woman’s absence to go and free his hound? What should I do? Try my luck, or hide in the house all night and leave when the dog was tied up early next morning?

 The music started again. I felt a wave of relief. No time to lose. I would leave directly by the window. I opened it and hauled myself out. The air outside was cool compared with the stuffy air in the office. I was only on the first floor, but the height of the ceiling was such that I found myself balanced on a narrow ledge more than 12 feet above the ground. I inched forward, arms outstretched, trying to push out of my mind the painful memory that was surfacing. I made my way to the corner of the building, where I slid down the drainpipe. I charged back around the outside edge of the garden. When I arrived in sight of the kennels, I gave a sigh of relief: Stalin was still tied up, gnawing away at his bone. He saw me come out of the shrubbery and stood up at once, his ears pricked. I called him gently by name, trying to defuse his aggressiveness before he alarmed the whole neighborhood. He couldn’t help but growl nastily, his jowls aquiver, showing his threatening fangs before sitting back down with his bone. He never took his eyes off me. Ungrateful creature.
A light came on inside the house. I ran to the little door and pulled. Locked? My piece of metal lay on the ground at my feet. Worried about Stalin, I had let the door shut without paying attention to it. Now I was caught like a rat in a trap. It was only a question of seconds before I was discovered. Anxiety overcame me, violent and oppressive, to which was added the anger of impotence. No other way out! The whole garden was surrounded by impassable railings, ten feet high, with spikes on the top. There was no nearby tree I could make use of, no wall, nothing. I caught sight of Stalin. He was moving his head, his teeth fastened on the bone, which he was shaking every now and then, his fangs shining white in the night. Behind him, the four great kennels were perfectly lined up just under the fence.
I swallowed hard.
Dubreuil had said that in the business world, persecutors didn’t choose their victims randomly. And what about dogs? Would Stalin attack me if I weren’t tormented by fear as soon as I saw him? How would he react if I were perfectly calm, relaxed, and even confident?
It was the only way out.
A little voice spoke inside me, a tiny whisper telling me I had to face this trial. Doubtless, the piece of metal had fallen by chance, but chance, Einstein said, was God traveling incognito. I had a premonition that life was

 presenting me with a chance to change and that if I didn’t grasp the proffered opportunity, I would remain forever ensnared in my fears.
My fears. Stalin terrified me. To what extent was his viciousness induced by the vision I had of him? Was my fear the fruit of his aggressiveness or the spark that set it off? Would I have the courage to confront my fear, master it, and then go up to him? A brave man only dies once, says the proverb, while the coward has already died a thousand times.
I took a deep breath and then slowly expelled all the air from my lungs. I did it again and again, deep breaths, calming myself down, freeing the slightest contraction of my muscles. Each breath helped me relax more. After a while, I felt my heartbeat slow down more.
Stalin’s a good boy, a good dog, I told myself. I’m good. I feel good. I feel confident—confident about me, confident about him. I like him, and he likes me, too. Everything’s fine.
I started walking forward slowly, looking vaguely in the direction of the first kennel and breathing calmly, relaxing more and more. Everything’s fine.
I continued walking, paying no attention to the dog, directing my thoughts to the color of the kennel, the mildness of the evening, the quiet of the garden.
I never once looked at Stalin, but out of the corner of my eye, I saw that he had lifted his head. I continued walking forward, keeping my attention and my thoughts on harmless aspects of my surroundings, maintaining my feeling of confidence and calm. I finally hauled myself up on top of the kennel. The good dog didn’t move. I climbed over the fence, then dropped down on the other side before disappearing into the night.

 25
FOR MORE THAN a month, I had been letting people I didn’t know govern my life. I had made it a point of honor to respect my promise. What had I been hoping for, exactly? That Dubreuil would keep his promise and make me a free and fulfilled man? But how could I become free by submitting to someone else’s will? I had closed my eyes, refusing to see this obvious paradox, blinded by the egocentric pleasure of having someone take an interest in me. And now I had discovered that our meeting wasn’t chance. These people had hidden motives I knew nothing about.
I could understand Dubreuil being concerned about my fate after the Eiffel Tower business. Saving someone’s life sets up something irresistible that makes you continue in the direction you have started. But it was impossible to explain him writing reports about me before our meeting. This incomprehension became a source of anxiety that was constantly with me. My sleep became disturbed, agitated. During the day I was tense and worried.
The wording of the terms of our pact was constantly on my mind: You must respect our contract; otherwise your life will come to an end.
My life was entirely in this man’s hands.
Then there was the additional fact that now I knew I was being followed. It’s difficult to live normally under those conditions. Whether you’re in the Métro, at the supermarket, or even sitting quietly in an outdoor café, you’re constantly aware that someone is observing you. Those first days, it made me change my habits: I would leave the Métro at the last moment, just before the doors shut, or duck out of a movie theater by the emergency exit. But far from freeing my mind, these pathetic acts simply reinforced my disquiet, and in the end I decided to give them up.
I heard nothing from Dubreuil in the following days, which instead of reassuring me, made my imagination run wild and the questions multiply.

 Did he know about my intrusion? Had I been tailed that night? Had the naked girl revealed my presence? And what effect would it have on the pact that bound us? Would he give me back my freedom or, on the contrary, increase the pressure on me? I didn’t think he was the type to capitulate that easily.
I spent Saturday wandering around Paris, trying to forget the situation I had gotten myself into. I walked at random through the narrow streets of the Marais, where the medieval buildings sometimes lean so much you wonder by what miracle they’re still standing. I lingered under the arches of the Place des Vosges. I walked along the Rue des Rosiers, where I stumbled onto a Jewish pastry shop that had kept intact the charm and atmosphere of past centuries. The smell of the cakes just out of the oven made me want to buy out the whole shop. I left with an apple strudel that was still warm, which I ate while walking along the old cobblestone streets among the weekend crowds. When evening came, I went back to my own neighborhood, exhausted but satisfied with my day, fully feeling the healthy fatigue of the flâneur, the stroller.
Reaching the corner of two dark, deserted streets, I jumped as I felt a hand on my shoulder. I turned around. I was face-to-face with Vladi, who towered over me.
“Follow me,” he said calmly but without any explanation.
“Why?” I hurriedly replied, looking around me and seeing, to my annoyance, that we were alone.
He didn’t reply but merely pointed to the Mercedes parked on the sidewalk. The rest of his body remained as motionless as a rock.
I didn’t have the strength to break into a sprint. Shouting would have been pointless.
“Just tell me why,” I pleaded.
“Monsieur Dubreuil order.”
He could scarcely have been more laconic. I knew I’d get nothing more
out of him.
He opened the car door. I didn’t budge. He, too, remained motionless,
calmly looking at me without any aggressiveness in his eyes. In the end I reluctantly got in. The door closed with a dull click. I was the only passenger. Ten seconds later he set off.

 The soft comfort of the seat transformed my fear into despondency. I felt like a fugitive, caught by the police, who is used to journeys in the police van and almost feels relieved. I found myself yawning.
“Where are you taking me?”
No answer.
“Tell me where we’re going, or else I’m getting out!”
No reaction. I felt a mixture of anger and apprehension.
The car finally stopped at a light. My muscles contracted, ready to leap
out. I tried the door handle on my side. Locked!
“Me put child protection so you not fall this night on highway.”
“What do you mean, highway, this night?”
“Me advise you sleep. Car all night.”
I stiffened instinctively, seized by a feeling of panic. What was all this
nonsense? I had to get out of here!
We drove past Ste-Marie Madeleine and turned down the Rue Royale.
There were no policemen I could try and signal through the window. The window. Yes, of course, the window! I could get out that way. Vladi’s window was already down; I could feel the air rushing in. He wouldn’t hear me opening my window if I did it while he was accelerating.
I waited nervously, my finger on the switch. We arrived at the Place de la Concorde. For a second, Vladi turned his head toward the Fontaine des Fleuves, where some teenagers were shouting and splashing each other. Conscious of playing my final card, I pressed the switch and the window came down. I held my breath. We passed in front of the Obélisque, and then the light turned red at the corner of the Champs-Elysées. The car stopped.
I dived out.
I was immediately gripped by the ankle, very hard, and felt myself being pulled back inside. I screamed, grabbing the door to keep my chest outside the car. I waved in the direction of some nearby cars, but the passengers were all turned the other way, admiring the lights of the Champs-Elysées. I struggled, shouted, banged on the body of the car.
Vladi managed to get me completely back in the car, almost ripping an ear off in the process.
“Calm down, calm down,” he said. There is nothing more annoying than hearing that. Especially coming from a man whose pulse is 25 while yours is 200.

 I continued to struggle, landing a few blows in vain. Finally, I swallowed my anger, resigned myself, and the car set off again. Then, everything happened very quickly. We sped across the Seine and past the Assemblée Nationale, then along the Boulevard Saint-Germain toward the Luxembourg Gardens. Ten minutes later, the long, black Mercedes was speeding along the highway to the south, a bird of prey cleaving the night.

 26
THE JOLTS WOKE me up. I opened my eyes and sat up, totally panicked, not knowing where I was. Seeing the back of Vladi’s head brought me back to earth. The Mercedes was climbing a very steep, stony track. Vladi didn’t even bother to avoid the many potholes, and the beams of his headlights bobbed up and down in the night, lighting up stone ruins, then getting lost among the stars.
I had tried to remain awake, but the long, monotonous hours on the highway had gotten the better of me. My mouth was dry.
“Where are we?” I said with difficulty.
“Soon there.”
The car was climbing a barren hillside. No houses in sight, only the dark
silhouettes of scrawny trees with tortured trunks that stood out against the stones and clumps of dried grass. I felt like I was on the way to prison.
The car stopped on a ledge near the top of the hill. The path was strewn with boulders from a wall that had partially collapsed. Vladi switched off the engine and suddenly everything was totally quiet. He remained motionless for a few moments and then got out. Warm air wafted into the car. My pulse began to race again. What were we doing in such a place?
Vladi stretched a few times to relax his back. A giant in his black suit, he resembled a huge scarecrow blown by the night wind. He opened my door. I shivered.
“Get out, please.”
I got out, pain stabbing me all over my body. The please reassured me a little, but when my eyes got used to the darkness and I could make out more of where we were, my anxiety level shot back up.
In front of us, tall and imposing, stood the ruins of an abandoned castle. The partially collapsed walls, lit from afar by the Mercedes’ headlights, were silhouetted against the black sky. A medieval tower with battlements

 was still standing, as if by magic, since its base was missing stones, leaving dark, gaping holes.
A deathly silence haunted the spot, broken only by the occasional gloomy call of a barn owl.
“Come,” he said.
He made a way for us through the scattered stones and weeds. The brambles tugged at our trousers, slowing us down.
My final hour had come. It was obvious that he would finish me off, in the middle of nowhere, with no one to see or hear us.
After a few yards, he turned around. “Arms up.”
“What?”
“You, arms up, please.”
The bastard was going to shoot me like a dog, and he had the gall to be polite about it. I felt the blood beating in my forehead.
I raised my arms.
He came over and frisked me from the shoulders to the knees. Twice he stopped and searched my pockets, emptying out their contents. He took my wallet with my ID, my money, my credit cards, and my Métro tickets, stuffing them in a black bag that he carefully zipped shut. No one would be able to identify my corpse, and as I had no family, no one would claim it. I would end up in a communal grave.
He glanced around furtively to check that there were no witnesses and then reached in his pocket.
I looked around us one last time, hoping to take with me some final images of the world, but the place was so dreary I shut my eyes.
“Take this,” he ordered.
I half-opened my eyelids. He was holding something out to me. Surely he wasn’t going to ask me to do the job myself?
“Here!”
I leaned forward, unable in the darkness to see the small object he was holding out. A coin. A one-euro coin.
“What am I supposed to do with that?”
At that moment, a guttural noise made me jump. In a horrible rustling of wings, a flock of bats flew out of a narrow slit in the tower.
Imperturbable, Vladi went on, “Take, please. You allowed this. It’s all.”

 “But ... I ... don’t understand.”
“Monsieur Dubreuil say you learn cope all alone. All alone. One euro, it’s all. Monsieur Dubreuil expect you for dinner tonight seven o’clock. You be on time. Monsieur Dubreuil hate late dinner.”
His mission accomplished, he turned around.
An enormous weight lifted from my shoulders, from my whole being. I felt ... empty. My legs shook. I couldn’t believe it. I would have hugged him if I had had the strength.
“Wait!” I called out.
He didn’t even glance back but got in the car and started the engine. He did a risky U-turn, stirring up a cloud of dust that seemed to catch fire in the headlights, then the Mercedes pulled away, shaken in every direction by the ruts in the track. It disappeared and silence fell again, a heavy, leaden silence. The darkness was almost total. I turned toward the castle and shivered. In the weak light of the waning moon, the ruins were even more frightening. The place gave off a deep malaise, not just the natural fear that you might legitimately feel in this sort of place. I had the inexplicable feeling that these ruins were charged with heavy emotion, past suffering. Horrible things had happened here, and the stones bore their invisible marks. I could have sworn it.
I ran down the slope, in a hurry to leave this frightening spot as quickly as possible. Several times, I nearly twisted my ankle on the loose stones. Out of breath, I came to some old, gray stone houses with roofs covered in strange round tiles. I slowed down.
Hunger was beginning to overtake me. I mustn’t think about it. I hadn’t eaten anything earlier that evening, waiting to get home to have dinner. Now I bitterly regretted it.
Walking on, I came to an old village, clinging to the side of a hill. There was nothing I could do before sunrise. I sat down on a stone bench worn smooth by time and took deep breaths, allowing my hands to run over its coarse surface. I imagined, behind the thick, stone walls of the houses, the slumbering villagers, sleeping peacefully in beds with rough sheets smelling of the sun that had dried them. I was glad to be alive.
Day finally broke and, along with it came the scents of nature at dawn. Before my eyes, an enchanting view unfolded. The village I was in was perched on the side of a small mountain with steep slopes covered in trees.

 A few hundred yards away was another small mountain, rising up to more or less the same height as the one I was on. At its summit was another village made up of old gray stone houses. Everywhere, covering the sides of the hills down to the bottom of the valleys, were bushes and trees and scrub, mostly prickly, in varying shades of green tinged with blue. The sun appeared, awakening the perfume of the umbrella pine that was covering me with its protective dome.
I set about exploring the village. It was immediately apparent that there was only one main street. I walked the length of the village without meeting a soul. But here and there through the open windows, I could hear voices, speaking with a regional accent.
I had to gather, as soon as possible, the information I needed to organize my return. Rounding a bend, I saw a café that seemed to be the last house in the village before the road dropped off into the valley. The doors were wide open, so I went in.
The ten or so people in the room instantly stopped talking. The barman— mustachioed, 50-ish—was wiping glasses behind the bar. As I headed across the room, I said a timid “hello” that got no response. The customers were suddenly absorbed in their thoughts, looking down at their glasses.
Reaching the bar, I again said hello, this time to the barman, who merely looked up without responding.
“May I have a glass of water, please?”
“A what?” he said loudly, looking around the room.
I turned just in time to see the derisive smiles, before the faces looked
down again.
“A glass of water. I have no money on me, and I’m dying of thirst.”
The barman didn’t answer but reached for a glass on a shelf, filled it from
the tap, then banged it down on the bar.
I took a few gulps. The silence was heavy. I had to break the ice.
“It’s going to be a lovely day, isn’t it?”
No answer. I went on, “I hope it won’t be too hot, though.”
The barman looked at me slightly mockingly as he continued wiping his
glasses. “Where are you from?” he finally asked.
A miracle. He’d said something.
“Right now, I’ve arrived from the castle ... up there. I just came down
this morning.”

 He looked up at the other customers, then back at me. “Look, we all know no one lives up there.”
“No ... but ... well, I was left at the castle last night, and I came down this morning. That’s all I meant. I’m not trying to be funny.”
“You’re from Paris, right?”
“Yes, you could say that.”
“Are you from Paris or aren’t you? It’s not a question of whether or not
you could say that.”
His accent was so musical I couldn’t work out if this was his ordinary
tone or he was annoyed. I needed information, so I had to keep the conversation going.
“Actually, this castle, how old is it?”
“The castle,” he said, wiping the glasses more slowly. “The castle used to belong to the Marquis de Sade.”
“The Marquis de Sade?!” I couldn’t suppress a shudder. “Yes.”
“And where are we, exactly?”
“What do you mean, where are we?”
“Well, what place are we in?”
Amused, he looked around the room, before saying, “You’ve been drinking more than water, haven’t you?”
“No, I haven’t!” I insisted. “It’s a long story. Just tell me where I am.” “You’re in Lacoste, in the Lubéron. You’re on another planet.” Suppressed giggles spread around the room. The barman was pleased
with himself.
“The Lubéron. So we’re in Provence, is that right?”
“Well, I never! See what you can do when you try!”
Provence. I must be 500 or 600 miles from Paris.
“Where’s the nearest train station?”
Again, he shot a look around the room.
“The nearest station is in Bonnieux,” he said, pointing to the village
perched on the opposite mountain.
I was saved. An hour or two’s walk, and I would be on my way home. “Do you know what time the next train for Paris leaves?”
Laughter in the room. The barman was jubilant.
“What’s so funny?” I asked. “Has it already left? Is that what’s funny?”

 The barman looked at his watch. More laughter.
“But it’s very early!” I said. “There must be another one later in the day. When does the last train leave?”
“The last train left ... in 1938.”
Guffaws all around. I swallowed hard. The barman was enjoying his success. While he was at it, he offered a round of drinks. Conversations picked up where they had left off when I came in.
“Here, let me offer you a drink,” the barman said, putting a glass of white wine on the bar in front of me. “To your health.”
We clinked glasses. I wasn’t going to tell him I didn’t drink on an empty stomach. I’d had my bellyful of mocking for the day.
“Look, the station at Bonnieux has been shut down for seventy years. Trains for Paris all leave from Avignon now. You’ll find nothing nearer.”
“Is it far to Avignon?”
He drank a sip of white wine, then wiped his moustache with the back of his hand.
“Forty-three kilometers.”
Almost 37 miles. That was a lot.
“Perhaps there’s a bus?”
“During the week there is, but not on Sunday. Today, apart from me,
nobody is working here,” he said, lifting his glass to his lips.
“You wouldn’t know someone who could take me to Avignon?”
“Today? With this heat, people don’t go out much, you know. Except to
church. Can’t you wait till tomorrow?”
“No, I absolutely have to be in Paris this evening.”
“Oh! Parisians are always in a rush, even on Sunday!”
I left, saying good-bye to all present, who this time returned my greeting. I walked along the street in the direction the barman had indicated. “The
road to Avignon is on the left, at the bottom,” he had said. I was bound to get a lift.
The lane meandered prettily down the hillside, which was covered in aromatic thorn bushes. I was in Provence! I’d heard so much about Provence. It was even more beautiful than I had imagined. I had pictured an arid region, beautiful but parched. But now, in front of me as far as the eye could see, was vegetation of amazing richness: Holm oaks, pine trees with their trunks glowing red in the sun, cedars, beech, cypress raising their

 bluish tint to the sky, and on the ground, thistles, broom, great clumps of rosemary, bushes with varnished leaves shamelessly showing off their gaudy beauty, and countless other varieties of plants. I was filled with wonder.
The sun, although still low in the sky, was beginning to beat down, and the heat revived the perfumes of nature, spreading a thousand exquisite scents that accompanied me through this paradise of the senses.
At the foot of the mountain, the road wound around the valley amidst orchards and groves of trees. I had been walking for more than an hour without seeing a single car. Hitchhiking wasn’t going to be easy. I was famished and had a slight headache as well. It was beginning to get really hot. I wasn’t going to be able to continue walking much longer.
Another 20 minutes had gone by when I heard the sound of an engine. A gray van came around the bend behind me, traveling at a moderate speed. It was at least 20 or 30 years old, the van version of the Citroën 2 CV, the Deux Chevaux, that I had seen in picture books of France when I was a kid. I stood right in the middle of the road, arms stretched wide. The driver jammed on its brakes with a screeching noise, and the van coughed, then stalled. The driver got out, a short man with a belly, gray hair, and a red complexion, obviously angry with me and perhaps also annoyed at having stalled.
“What a stupid thing to do! What are you playing at, for Christ’s sake? It hasn’t got the brakes of a Ferrari on it, you know, I nearly ran you over! And who’d pay for the repairs? You can’t get spares for love or money!”
“I’m sorry. Look, I’ve got a problem: I absolutely must get to Avignon as quickly as possible. I’ve been walking two hours in this sun. I haven’t eaten since yesterday afternoon, and I’m at the end of my rope. You’re not going that way, by any chance, are you?”
“Avignon? What the hell would I be going there for?”
“Perhaps where you’re going would bring me a bit closer?”
“Well, I’m going to Les Poulivets. It’s a bit in that direction, but look
here, I’ve got to stop on the way. I’ve got things to do.”
“No problem! The main thing is to get me closer. Then I’m bound to find
another car.”
I could feel he was about to give in. “Please ...”

 “Okay, get in the back, I’ve got lots of things in the front, and I’m not going to clear it all out for you. I don’t even know you.”
“Great!”
We went around the vehicle, and he opened one side of the back door. “Sit there,” he said, pointing to two wooden crates that took up the tiny
space inside.
I had barely climbed inside when he slammed the door shut, throwing me
into complete darkness. I fumbled my way to the crates and sat down as best I could.
He had two tries at starting before the engine sputtered to life and the van moved off, vibrating all over. A strong odor of diesel surrounded me.
I had great difficulty remaining seated. The top of my crate was strangely sloped, and I nearly slid off each time he accelerated, took a bend, or braked. I blindly felt around the sides of the van but could find nothing to hold onto. The situation was so absurd I had a fit of the giggles. It was the first time in my life I had laughed by myself.
The van finally stopped. The motor choked, and I heard the driver’s door slam. Then, nothing. Silence. Surely he wasn’t going to leave me in here?
“Hello! Hello!” I called.
No answer.
Suddenly, I made out a slight humming noise. It seemed to be coming
from under the car. Then the sound of voices outside. When you can’t see, your other senses become more acute. The humming intensified. Yes, that’s it, the sound was coming from ... inside my crate! But, good God! Surely it wasn’t ...? Yes, a BEEHIVE!
I stood up at once and banged my head on the roof. At that moment, the front door slammed, the engine coughed, and the van leapt forward. I was thrown against the back door and fell down, stuck between the door and the hives.
We must have been going down a dirt track, as the ride was so bumpy. Staying where I was seemed the best thing to do. I had only one worry: being stung by my thousands of traveling companions. Could they get out of their hives?
We finally stopped again, not without a final shake from the engine. The front door slammed. I waited. The back door opened suddenly, and I fell to the ground at my liberator’s feet.

 “Yes, I thought I smelled wine on you! You don’t eat anything, but you have to have your little drink, right?”
I looked up at him, completely blinded by the light.
“It’s not what you think.”
“I believe what I see, like Saint Thomas, or rather, what I smell!”
I got up, blinking to get used to the strong light.
The view that offered itself was dazzling. At my feet were laid out
opulent rows of lavender, flooding the valley we were in with blue, caressing the bases of the fruit trees that bordered it, and rising up the hill in the distance. From this colored beauty came a delicious perfume that almost made me forget the awkward situation I was in. But the most impressive thing was the song, or rather the din of the cicadas! The chirring sound was so loud it seemed as if all the cicadas in Provence had come here to greet me.
“Come on, out of the way, I’ve got things to do!”
The driver leaned inside the van and grabbed one of the hives.
“Here, help me! We can take one each.”
I followed him, carrying my hive at arm’s length.
“We’ll put them there,” he said, pointing to a space in the middle of the
flowers.
“You make lavender honey?” I said, marveling. “I never imagined that
people moved hives to put them in lavender fields.”
“What do you think? That it’s enough to give them a road map and tell
them not to stop on the other flowers on the way?”
With that, he turned back to the van.
“So tell me the truth,” he said. “Why are you in such a hurry to get the
train in Avignon?”
“Actually, it’s a bit complicated. Let’s say I’ve been given a sort of
challenge. My identification and my money were taken away, and I’ve got to find a way of getting back to Paris. To succeed, I’ve got to be back by the end of this afternoon at the latest.”
“A test? You mean it’s a game?”
“Sort of, yes.”
He looked at me sideways, and then a light shone in his eyes.
“Ha! I’ve got it, you’re doing the qualifying tests for a TV show like The
Amazing Race! Is that it?”

 “Actually ...”
“Well, I never! When I tell my wife about this, she’s never going to believe me!”
“Yes but—”
“And then, if you’re selected, we’ll see you on TV this winter.”
“Wait, I didn’t—”
“She’ll never believe it! Never!”
“Listen ...”
“Wait, wait ...”
He suddenly had an inspired look.
“Look,” he said, “suppose I take you straight to Avignon station? Does
that mean you’re sure to win?”
“Yes, but ...”
“Right. Here’s how it is: I’ll take you straight to the station if you’ll come
back with me and pose for photos with the family. What do you say?” “Well, actually ...”
“Just a few photos, and we’ll be off to the station! That way, you’ll be
selected, and we’ll see you on TV!” He didn’t wait for an answer. “Come on, off we go! Hurry up!”
He opened the back door again, all excited. “Stay in the back. I can’t move everything. We haven’t got time. You’ve got a challenge!”
I sat on the floor, glad to be traveling on my own this time. I could hear talking on the other side of the thin metal partition. My driver was on his cell phone.
“Hi, Josette! Get out the aperitifs; I’m bringing a contestant from The Amazing Race. No, The Amazing Race, I’m telling you. Are you there? We’ll see him on TV this winter. Yes, I’m telling the truth. Go and get the camera, and check that there are batteries in it! Batteries, I said. Yes. And tell Michel; he’ll never believe it. And call Babette as well and tell her to get a move on if she wants to be in the photo. There’s no signal. Hurry up. You there?”
My God, he was rounding up the whole planet. Oh, no, what was I going to tell them?
After a quarter of an hour, the car finally stopped, and I heard lively conversation.

 My door was opened, and once my eyes got used to the dazzling light again, I saw about a dozen people gathered in a welcoming committee.
“Hey, what’s your name, by the way?” asked my driver.
“Alan.”
“Alan? That’s an American star’s name. It’ll look good on the TV.” “Alan ...” murmured a pregnant woman in the group, looking
transported.
I don’t think I’d ever been photographed so much in all my life. I could
already see myself ensconced on any number of mantelpieces, until the next season of the TV game show started.
My driver was jubilant. He was the center of attraction. He was drinking aperitif after aperitif and beginning to turn quite red. Three times, he ignored my request to leave for the station.
“Look, I really must go. Otherwise I’m going to miss the train, and all this will have been pointless.”
“Wait, wait ... Oh, they’re so stressed, these Parisians!”
He picked up his phone.
“Mom, hurry up, I said. And tell Grandpa, he’ll never forgive me
otherwise!”
“No,” I said. “This is no good. You must keep your side of the deal.
Now!”
He didn’t appreciate my remark at all, and his red face went purple. “Listen, I didn’t make you get in my van, right? I think it was rather the
opposite, wasn’t it? So don’t be ungrateful now, or else I’m not going to Avignon!”
Now he was really getting fired up.
Perhaps it was already too late to arrive at Dubreuil’s for 7 o’clock dinner. Dubreuil. He said it was important to be able to get things from other people. But how could I do that here? What would Dubreuil do?
Push him, he’ll push you back. Don’t push, pull.
I immediately had an idea, but something held me back. Up till now, I had been riding along on a misunderstanding, but I didn’t want to openly lie. Right. Let’s put things differently.
“You know, if I end up on TV one day, I’ll probably be allowed to invite a guest or two,” I said.
He looked up, suddenly all ears.

 “But,” I went on, “I don’t want to build up false hopes.”
“If I take you straight to the station, you promise to invite me on the set?” the driver asked, suddenly as serious as if he was negotiating putting a hundred beehives on my lavender field.
“Yes, but I’m reluctant to break up your little party.”
He turned to the others and spoke in a loud voice.
“My friends,” he said. “Carry on without us. I’ll be back in less than an
hour. I’m taking Alan to Avignon. He’s got to win his challenge.”
Half an hour later, I was getting on a high-speed train for the capital, my
stomach still as empty, my only euro still in my pocket.
I knew the regulations: Traveling without a ticket meant a fine; with no
ID on me, it was the police station on arrival.
I had a plan, which was worth trying. I remained standing, looking out
for the ticket inspector in the distance. When I saw him appear at the other end of the car, I ducked into the bathroom and shut the door without locking it. If he thought it was empty, he’d go past without stopping. I waited. The minutes went by, and nothing happened. I was alone, shut in with the continuous noise of the train and the dreadful smell of the toilet.
Suddenly, the door opened, and a surprised passenger found himself face- to-face with me. Over his shoulder, my eyes met those of an obviously very satisfied little man with a black moustache and dark, frowning eyebrows, wearing a navy blue cap and uniform.

 27
FROWNING, CATHERINE LEANED forward slightly. “I’d like to talk about the way you helped Alan stop smoking.”
Yves Dubreuil sank back in his teak armchair and swirled the ice cubes around in his glass of bourbon, a slight smile on his lips. He loved going back over his exploits and commenting on them.
“You made him smoke more and more until he was disgusted by it, is that right?”
“Not at all,” he replied, with the satisfaction of someone whose actions are so clever that not even a professional can understand them.
“I thought ...”
“No, in fact, I simply reversed the current,” he said.
“Reversed the current?”
He took his time answering, savoring the bourbon as much as the wait he
was imposing on Catherine. The day had been particularly hot, and now they were enjoying the mild evening in the garden, comfortably seated in front of a tray of cookies.
Dubreuil finally broke the silence. “Remember, Alan said his problem was freedom. He really wanted to stop smoking somewhere deep down, but what was holding him back was the feeling of freedom he associated with cigarettes. Everyone was advising him to stop, so he didn’t feel free to choose. Stopping his habit would have made him feel he was giving up his freedom in order to submit to the will of others.”
Catherine was listening closely, concentrating on his words.
“So I reversed the current,” he continued. “I made it so that smoking became for him a restrictive act imposed from outside. From then on, freedom changed sides. It was by stopping that he could satisfy his thirst for freedom.”

 Catherine said nothing, but an attentive observer might have seen a gleam of admiration in her eyes.

 28
THEY WAITED UNTIL the waiter from the Intercontinental Hotel had finished serving them. “Please call if you need anything whatsoever, Monsieur Dunker,” he murmured before withdrawing.
The brown leather padded door to the private room closed silently. Marc Dunker looked around him at the opulent mahogany bookcases filled with books bound in red leather a little too shiny to be old. Lamps with gilt bases and emerald-green opaline shades added to the intimate, rather somber atmosphere of the room.
Dunker had chosen this place on Andrew’s advice. Situated on the Place de l’Opéra, not far from the office, the hotel offered, according to Andrew, a setting that commanded respect and a certain reserve—very English qualities favorable to productive negotiations. It was the third time the trio had met there, and Dunker was still pleased with the choice. He particularly appreciated the large leather armchairs that seemed to swallow up his two principal shareholders, while his height enabled him to enjoy an advantageous position. He was convinced this arrangement had an impact on their relations that was far from negligible.
“We’ve reached agreement,” said the pudgier of the two men meeting with Dunker, casting a glance at his colleague. He smiled as he spoke, from time to time raising his eyebrows, which created waves of creases on his nearly bald head. Short and plump, David Poupon, despite his age, still looked like a big smiling baby, with a friendly manner that Dunker was enormously suspicious of. The CEO preferred the other shareholder, Rosenblack, who was much leaner and less friendly. Never looking up from the papers he was going through, Rosenblack didn’t make the slightest effort to hide the fact that he had no interest whatsoever in Dunker as a person.

 Dunker screwed up his eyes, concentrating on Poupon, who was announcing their demands. “We have reached the conclusion that for both the investment fund I run and the pension fund represented by our friend here,” he said, smiling in the direction of Rosenblack, who was still absorbed in his papers, “your company must produce fifteen percent profits in the next quarter, and the market price of the shares must increase by at least eighteen percent annually.”
Dunker remained silent until he was sure Poupon had finished. He then gave himself a few seconds to drink a sip of cognac. He knew the power of silence.
“I can’t promise an eighteen percent increase in the stock price, because I don’t control all the parameters, as you know. And then ...”
He took a second sip of his drink, keeping his audience in suspense.
“And then, there’s that stupid bastard of a journalist, Fisherman, who continues to undermine our image by repeating nonsense about us. Unfortunately, his analyses influence the financial markets.”
“We are convinced you are capable of managing this sort of situation,” Poupon said. “It’s for that very reason that at the last annual meeting we chose to keep you as CEO.”
Dunker heard the barely veiled threat loud and clear. “You know as well as I do that journalists can’t be controlled,” he told Poupon. “Try as we might to feed him good news at every opportunity, Fisherman repeats in article after article that our teams are not productive enough, which is quite untrue. I keep them under pressure, and they work hard,” he said, with the pride of a captain defending his troops.
“There’s rarely smoke without fire,” said Rosenblack without looking up. “I have every confidence in your ability to find a solution,” said Poupon. After several minutes of silence, Dunker announced, “I’ve got an idea,
but I need your agreement beforehand, because it’s not without consequences.”
“Ha! See what you can do when you want to?” Poupon was clearly satisfied to have been right.
Dunker ignored the dig. “My idea is based on an artificial inflating of the turnover.”
Rosenblack at last raised a glum eye in Dunker’s direction, like a sleepy old dog lying by the fireside, who wonders, without really believing it,

 whether the word walk hasn’t just been slipped into the conversation.
“Until now,” Dunker explained, “we have followed strict procedures to check the solvency of our customers before signing contracts with them. If they show financial difficulties, we demand that they pay the total fee in advance, which of course they rarely accept. If we changed that rule and closed our eyes to the financial health of new clients, we would get an
immediate increase in turnover of about twenty percent.”
Poupon, attentive, had a look of complicity. Rosenblack looked skeptical. “I have calculated,” Dunker went on, “that if we did this, we would risk
having thirty percent of payments outstanding, which wouldn’t be too problematic for two reasons. One, the stock exchange only looks at the turnover figures and couldn’t care less about outstanding payments. Two, our consultants get their commissions on the basis of client payments, not on the turnover figures as such. No payment, no commission. So we’ll do all right. Overall, we won’t lose too much, and the share price will go up.”
“Excellent,” said Poupon.
Rosenblack slowly nodded. “And what about the fifteen percent profits?” he asked.
Dunker slowly took another sip of cognac. “You can leave that to me.”
Poupon smiled. “Perfect! But that’s bad news for you. The golden parachute of three million euros that’s provided for you in your contract in case of severance won’t be coming your way this year.”
Even Rosenblack made an effort to laugh, as the three men clinked glasses.
“You find us tough,” Poupon told Dunker, “but that’s how the world goes around: You’re tough with your colleagues, we’re tough with you, and our own clients are tough with us. We’ve always got someone above us, haven’t we?”

 29
“I DON’T BELIEVE you. Not for a single second.”
The assertion came like a sentence with no possibility of appeal, followed by a heavy silence, under the depressing light cast by the old neon tube.
“But it’s the truth,” I protested, quite at a loss.
The policeman was walking back and forth behind his desk. I was perched uncomfortably on what looked like a little school chair. The place was really getting me down. I was hungry. Desperately hungry. And I was really pissed off.
“Let’s start again at the beginning.”
“It’s the fourth time ...”
I had begun by trying to reply to the policeman’s questions as vaguely as
possible, talking about a challenge I was supposed to meet, trying to make him believe, without overtly lying, that I was the victim of a sort of initiation rite. But the guy seemed to be taking the matter very seriously. All this for traveling without a ticket. Didn’t he have anything better to do? Finally, he trapped me by bombarding me with questions, cross-examining me until I had to spill the beans and tell him all about my relations with Dubreuil. Even so, he absolutely refused to believe me. So I tried as energetically as I could to convince him of my good faith, but the more I argued, the more he questioned what I was saying.
“You say you are following the instructions given by a man you don’t know, who is trying to help you but frightens you, who took your ID and dropped you off in his Mercedes at the other end of France to develop your coping skills. Is that right?”
“Yes, in a nutshell.”
“And you think I’m going to swallow something like that? In all the time I’ve been doing this job, I’ve never heard anything so ridiculous!”

 I would never be able to convince him. It would take me all evening, perhaps all night. I had to approach it differently. How could I persuade him I was telling the truth?
If you push, he’ll resist. Reverse the current.
I had an idea.
“There’s something else ...” I said in a confessional tone of voice.
He couldn’t hide the hint of a smile, thinking he was about to make me
fess up. “What?”
I waited a few moments. “Oh, no, I can’t tell you.”
He stared at me, a little surprised. “Why not?”
I looked him straight in the eyes. “Because I don’t trust you.” Imperceptibly, his face went purple. “What do you mean, don’t trust?”
I took my time. “I don’t trust ... your ability to listen.”
“What are you talking about?” he stammered, getting redder and redder.
I looked down at the ground and put on a sad face. “It’s a private story,
and I don’t want to confide in someone who can’t even be bothered to sit down to listen to me.”
He swallowed hard.
“And in any case,” I went on, “as you won’t believe me, there’s no point in talking to you about it.”
Several seconds went by. I wasn’t looking at him, but I could feel that he hadn’t taken his eyes off me. I could hear the sound of his breathing.
He sat down.
The silence lasted a long while.
I decided to tell him everything.
“I attempted suicide, a while ago. A man was there by chance. That’s
what I thought, at least. He saved my life in exchange for my irrevocable promise to do all he asked. For my own good.”
He listened in silence.
“It’s a sort of pact,” I went on. “I accepted it of my own free will.”
The heat in the office was stifling. I needed air.
“And you’ve really done all he asked?”
“You could say that, yes.”
“You realize that if he made you do illegal things, you’re the one who’s
responsible?”

 “He hasn’t asked that. Besides, he didn’t explicitly tell me to take the train without a ticket. That’s not the problem.”
“Even so, I don’t understand why you followed his orders like that. You were free to end your agreement, after all. Anyone would have done so in your position.”
“I’ve often asked myself that. I don’t know, I think I attached too much importance to keeping my word.”
“Come on, come on, you’re not one of the Three Musketeers! Loyalty’s a good thing, but here your own interests are at stake.”
“Until recently, what he demanded of me was, I’ll grant you, difficult to do, but at the same time it brought me a lot. I felt as if I was getting somewhere.”
“I really don’t see how it’s brought you anything but trouble,” the policeman said.
“You know, I was very alone when I met him, and it’s very pleasant to have someone take an interest in you, look after you.”
“Wait. To sum up, he extorted your promise at a time when you were weak, desperate. He takes you in hand, you follow him to the letter, and you shut your eyes as to his intentions. Is that right? But that’s the way religious cults operate!”
“No, that’s not what frightens me. Besides, the cults are after your money. He asks nothing. Given his age and his wealth, he can’t be in need of much.”
“Come on. He’s not doing all this just to please you!”
“You’re right. That’s the problem. I don’t know what his motives are. I discovered recently he was having me followed and that he had begun that before the meeting at the Eiffel Tower.”
“So it wasn’t by chance he was there the day of your ...”
“Suicide attempt. No, he wasn’t there by chance. But I’d never seen him before, I could swear. I don’t know why he had me followed before that either. I can’t explain it, and it’s driving me crazy.”
The old neon bulb flickered. The policeman looked at me, concerned. Having pushed me hard at the beginning of the interrogation, he now seemed to be expressing a certain empathy. I felt he was sincerely worried about my fate.
“Can you help me?” I asked.

 “There’s nothing, absolutely nothing I can do,” he said, shaking his head. “If he hasn’t committed a crime, I can’t even start an investigation.”
“In his house, there’s a notebook filled with notes on me. The notes prove he is having me followed.”
“If the notebook is in his house, I don’t have access to it. We’d need a search warrant, and no judge would give us one, as there isn’t the slightest hint of an offense that’s been committed. In any case, it’s not against the law to follow people.”
“You know, the most complicated thing about this affair is that I have doubts,” I said. “And there’s a part of me that feels guilty at having told you all this.”
“I don’t follow.”
“I can’t be a hundred percent sure that his intentions are bad. I’ll admit I was frightened to discover he’d had me followed before our first meeting. But putting that aside, I can’t blame him for anything. Quite objectively, he’s done nothing harmful to me.”
“Look, you can’t rule out that he’s some old madman who thinks he’s God-knows-who and gets pleasure out of playing the role of a savior and mentor. The simplest thing is to tell him you don’t want to continue, that you’re breaking the pact. You say, ‘Thanks for everything, and good-bye,’ and that’s the end of it.”
“Impossible.”
“What’s to stop you?”
“I didn’t tell you, but ... I promised on my life.”
“What do you mean, on your life?”
“I agreed to forfeit my life if I don’t do what he asks.”
He looked at me for a moment, completely dumbstruck.
“Is this a joke?”
“No.”
“You’re as mad as he is! Don’t ask me to help you now!”
“But you can’t leave me in danger, now that you’re aware of the
situation!”
I cast a glance at the clock on the wall. “Right. I’ve got to be going,
then,” I said, getting up. “I’ve got to be at his house at seven o’clock.”
The policeman looked at me without saying anything. Deep in thought,
he suddenly leapt up, bothered.

 “Wait. What proof is there that all this isn’t a fairy tale? That you haven’t completely invented this story to get home peacefully?”
He was frowning, his face crimson again.
“If you don’t believe me, come with me to his house.”
He was obviously not expecting this answer. He looked first at me, then
at the clock.
“Where is it?”
I searched in my pockets and took out Dubreuil’s calling card, creased
and limp as an old piece of material. He grabbed it and read it with a frown. “In the sixteenth arrondissement?” he asked, recognizing the upscale
address.
He hesitated a few seconds and then crossed the room to knock softly on
a door.
“Sort it out yourself!” growled a voice on the other side.
The policeman thought for a moment, obviously torn between conflicting
desires, and then went and opened a little metal cupboard. He got out a car key.
“Follow me!” he said.
An hour later, the policeman carefully put the key back in the cupboard. Still locked away in his office, his boss apparently hadn’t noticed his absence.
There was no time to lose. The case he had been waiting for for months had just dropped into his lap all on its own, exactly as he had hoped. The young man hadn’t lied. He had indeed gone into a mansion belonging to a certain Dubreuil. What a house! The policeman had never seen one like it. You didn’t find residences like that around the Gare de Lyon, the railroad station, or the other areas he was used to. Who could afford a thing like that? No doubt more dirty money, he said to himself.
He would have to investigate without arousing the suspicions of his boss, who wouldn’t fail to stop him or to take over what, he was sure, was going to allow him to reveal at last his real talents as a policeman.
The Gare de Lyon would soon have to make do without him.
 
 30
THE HOUSE STOOD out against the twilight sky, a dark building full of mysteries and secrets.
I was taken to the library. Crossing the hall, I couldn’t help but glance into the drawing room where I had seen the naked woman on the piano. The piano lay sadly abandoned in the semi-shade of the immense room, without either muse or musician to bring it to life.
I found Dubreuil comfortably settled in one of the library’s deep leather armchairs, smoking. I was sure he hadn’t had me followed from the village of Lacoste. It would have been mission impossible. So he couldn’t know I had confided in the police.
Catherine was sitting opposite me. She greeted me. On the low table in front of them, I recognized my wallet and the rest of my personal effects.
“You see, in the end, money’s useless. We can do without it very well!” Dubreuil said, an enormous Monte Cristo between his teeth.
What was he hiding behind his smile? What did this man want out of me in the end? Suppose the policeman was right? Perhaps he was the guru of some sect, or even a retired former guru, enriched with money extorted from his disciples, tormenting one last stray sheep to pass the time.
“By the way,” he went on, “you didn’t tell me how your interview with your director went.”
So many things had happened to me since then that it seemed a long way away.
“Not bad.”
I had been hungry for a day and a half, but Dubreuil didn’t seem in any hurry to sit down to dinner.
“Did you resist the temptation to justify yourself when he goaded you, and did you ask him embarrassing questions in return?”

 “Yes, and it worked really well. On the other hand, I didn’t get much out of him. I wanted to negotiate additional resources for our department. I had to forget about that.”
“Did you try hard enough to enter his universe and share his way of thinking before you tried to convince him?”
“Yes, more or less. Let’s say I tried to demonstrate that my ideas served his requirements of efficiency and profitability. Anyhow, I think our values are so far apart that it would be impossible for me to endorse his vision of things, even to pretend. You know, it’s hard to assume the values of your enemy.”
Dubreuil puffed at his cigar.
“The idea isn’t to endorse to his values. If they’re not yours, it’s impossible. But it’s useful to make a distinction in your mind between the person and his values. Even if his values are despicable, the person can always be salvaged. So what counts is to stop judging those values for an instant and to tell yourself that even if they shock you, the only hope you have of making that person change his vision is to not reject him along with his ideas. Then, entering into his universe means trying to put yourself in his place, as if you were already in his skin, feeling from the inside what it is to believe what he believes, think what he thinks, and feel what he feels, before returning to your position. Only a process like this will allow you to really understand that person without judging him, to understand what motivates him and also what makes him go wrong, if that is the case.”
“Hmm ...”
“There’s a difference between endorsing and understanding. If you put yourself in your boss’s shoes sufficiently to understand his way of thinking without judging him, you’ll be more tolerant of him, which he’ll feel. And from then on, you’ll be able to entertain the hope that he’ll change.”
“I’m not sure that he has any idea what others think about him,” I said, “or if it even bothers him! But okay, let’s suppose that I manage to enter sufficiently into his universe for him not to feel judged or rejected. What is there to make him budge from his present position? Don’t I risk reinforcing his position instead?”
“Remember the other day when we practiced synchronizing ourselves with the other’s gestures? I told you that after a while, if you do it long enough with the genuine intention of joining that person in their universe,

then when you change your posture, the other person will start to follow you, even without realizing it.”
“Yes.”
“I think this happens because a sort of fusion is created at a very deep, unconscious level, even if no words have been exchanged. That quality of relationship is felt in one way or another, and it is so rare that each person wants to preserve it, to make it last.”
“I see ...”
“So, to reply to your previous question, I would say that if you manage, by entering without judgment into your enemy’s universe—by slipping into his skin, his feelings, and his way of thought—to create this quality of human relationship that is so rare that he has perhaps never experienced it before, deep down he will want to preserve it so much that you’ll only have to become yourself again, to naturally express your own values, for him to want to take an interest in them. You won’t need to ask him to change, or need to give him a lesson in morality. Being yourself will be enough, thanks to the relatiorelationship you have created. You will have unconsciously made him want to open himself up to you, to discover your values, and, in the end, to allow himself to be influenced a little by you and thereby to modify his position. To change, in other words.”
“You mean that having met him on his own ground, I make him want to come and discover mine?”
“Sort of. By being yourself, you present him with another model of the world, another vision of things, another way of behaving and acting, which he will be interested in without you having to criticize him or make demands.”
“It reminds me of our conversation about Gandhi ...”
“Yes. We must be the change we want to see in the world.”
I remained deep in thought. This perspective seemed very beautiful and
admirable and, at the same time, difficult to realize. Would I have the desire, the courage, and the patience necessary to create the relationship that Dubreuil presented as an indispensable prerequisite to changing the other?
“To live for the business seems so pathetic,” I told him. “When I was in the States, I knew a guy, Brian, who used to say: ‘You want to make God crack up? Tell him your plans!’”
Catherine burst out laughing. I had forgotten she was there. Dubreuil took a sip of bourbon.
“Perhaps, for your boss, it’s a way of forgetting the tragedy of his existence.”
“The tragedy of his existence?”
“Deep in our unconscious,” he went on, “we men are wounded by our inability to bear children and give life. I am utterly convinced that the professional ambition so prevalent in most of us comes from the unresolved need to compensate for this lack, to fill this sort of existential void.”
I was dumbstruck. I had never imagined anything like that, never made such a connection. To me, the mad race for power was just the result of a mixture of aggressiveness and competitive energy, common masculine traits. It was strange to hear this from Dubreuil’s lips, since I had the definite feeling that he had a certain taste for power. Could he be this insightful about himself?
After all, the misogyny of some men springs from an inferiority complex.
“To get back to my situation in the office,” I said. “I don’t know if the managing director is jealous of his wife, but I can’t get anything out of him.”
Dubreuil looked rather annoyed. Was it because I wasn’t succeeding in applying his teachings, or because he wasn’t able to transmit them as effectively as he would like?
He tossed his cigar into a large brass ashtray.
“You have within yourself all the necessary resources to take control of your life without passively accepting what others want to force on you,” he declared.
He drank the remainder of his bourbon, banged the glass down on the coffee table, and stood up.
Catherine kept her eyes down on her notes.
“Here’s what you’re going to do,” he said with a Machiavellian smile, as he paced up and down in front of the bookcases. “It’s a new task you have to carry out.”
“Yes?”
“You think your managing director is mistaken, that his decisions are bad for the company?”
“That seems obvious.”
 “You feel that the company should be managed differently, incorporating criteria other than purely financial ones?”
“Absolutely.”
“So take his place.”
“Very funny.”
He looked me in the eyes. “I’m not joking, Alan.”
“Yes, you are!”
He frowned. “No, I assure you.”
I suddenly had grave doubts. Was he really serious?
Seeing my obvious embarrassment, he looked at me in silence for a few
seconds.
“What’s stopping you?” he asked in a honeyed voice.
I was thrown off balance by the question; it seemed so incongruous.
What do you reply to someone who kindly asks you what’s stopping you from becoming a foreign minister or an international star?
“But that’s obvious,” I said. “Come on, let’s be realistic. There are limits to what we’re capable of doing.”
“The only limits are the ones we give ourselves.”
I could feel myself getting angry. I knew him too well to think he would let go now. I was in a mess. Obviously, the guy swung between moments of lucidity, subtle analysis, and wild ravings.
“You do realize he’s not even my boss? He’s my boss’s boss’s boss! There are three levels in the hierarchy between us!”
Catherine had looked up and was staring at Dubreuil now.
“He who wants to climb the mountain mustn’t let its height impress him.”
“But have you ever set foot inside a company? You can’t jump the rungs like that! There are rules!”
“The person who obeys rules avoids thinking. If you think inside the box, the only solutions you’ll find are those that everyone else has already thought of. You have to think outside the box.”
“Fine words, but what exactly would you do in my place?”
He sat on the arm of his chair and smiled as he looked at me.
“Find out for yourself, Alan. Dig into your resources.”
I got up, determined to leave. I wasn’t going to stay and have dinner with
a madman.

 “There’s no way I can do that.”
He spoke slowly, in a deep voice: “It’s your last mission. Carry it out, and I will give you back your freedom.”
My freedom. I looked up at him. He was smiling.
“You can’t make my freedom depend on an impossible task. I won’t accept that.”
“But you’re not in a position to choose, my dear Alan. Do I have to remind you of your promise?”
“How can I keep my promise if you make it impossible to do so?”
His eyes bore down on me with a look that was imperious, demanding, pitiless.
“I order you to become the managing director of Dunker Consulting.” I met his gaze.
“I’m giving you three weeks,” he said.
“It’s impossible.”
“It’s an order. Whatever happens, meet me on August 29th. I’ll be waiting for you at eight o’clock at the Jules Verne.”
My heart skipped a beat. The Jules Verne is the restaurant in the Eiffel Tower. As he said it, he lowered his voice, pronouncing the name very slowly, without taking his eyes off me. The threat was clear, awful. I felt my legs go weak. My past hopes were vain. I was definitely in the hands of a madman.
We remained motionless and silent, face-to-face, then I turned around. Walking to the door, I caught Catherine’s eyes. She looked as appalled as I did.

 31
“YVES DUBREUIL DOESN’T exist,” the policeman told me over the phone.
“Excuse me?”
“You heard right: Yves Dubreuil doesn’t exist.”
“I was with him two hours ago.”
“His real name is Igor Dubrovski.”
When I heard the name, I immediately felt vaguely uneasy without
knowing why.
“He’s a White Russian,” the policeman went on, “a nobleman. His
parents left Russia at the time of the revolution. They took their fortune with them. Apparently, it was one heap of dough. Then Igor was educated in France and the States. He became a psychiatrist.”
“Psychiatrist?”
“Yes, a psychiatrist. But he hasn’t practiced much.”
“Why?”
“I can’t get that info now, on a Sunday. It would appear he was struck off
the register of doctors. I was told it’s very rare for that to happen, so he must have done something serious. If I were you, I’d watch out.”
At that moment I heard someone bellowing in the background. Snatches of conversation: “Who are you talking to? Who is it?” Then muffled sounds. The policeman must be putting his hand over the receiver.
“Headquarters has phoned,” he told me when he resumed our conversation. “They say you’ve been asking for records. What are you up to? I don’t want any hassle. You follow me? And also ...”
I heard the beeping noise of a broken connection. He must have hung up. I suddenly felt alone, very alone, with a rising wave of anxiety.
I put down the phone. My apartment seemed very quiet, very empty. I was dumbfounded. The simple fact that Dubreuil had lied to me about his

 identity made me feel deeply uneasy. The man I had confided in wasn’t who I thought he was.
Something serious. How serious could it be?
The physical and nervous fatigue that had built up since my kidnapping 24 hours earlier hit me like a sledgehammer, and I suddenly felt drained. I turned out the lights and curled up in bed, but in spite of my exhaustion, sleep didn’t come.
Fear slowly took possession of me as the terms of my promise to Dubreuil came to mind: On your life.
This guy was quite capable of carrying out his threat. I was certain of that now.
I woke up in the middle of the night, covered in sweat. An answer had come to me in my sleep, at an hour when the unconscious, now the only one in charge, can find a lost memory in the bottomless pit of knowledge, experiences, and information that we’ve long since forgotten. Dubrovski was the name of the man who had written the article on suicide I had read— the one that revealed how to reach the girders of the Eiffel Tower, presented as an ideal place for a spectacular suicide.
 
 32
I SPENT THE next day in a strange state. Apart from the insidious fear that accompanied me all the time now, I again felt dreadfully alone. That was even harder to bear than the fear.
In this hostile universe, only Alice found favor in my eyes. Granted, she was just a colleague, not a friend, but I valued her genuineness, her naturalness. I felt she quite simply liked me, without any ulterior motive. That was already a lot.
I saw four candidates during the day—strangers, of course, who talked about their lives in a favorable light. I found myself envying them, wishing I was in their place, pursuing a path they hoped would lead to a career, without asking metaphysical questions about the meaning of their lives. I wanted to become their friend, forgetting that their warm expressions were simply aimed at gaining my favor as a recruiter.
I left the office early. Outside my apartment building, I lingered with Étienne on the old stone stairs. I don’t know why his presence and his serene expression reassured me so much. We talked about anything and everything while eating the still-warm apple turnovers I had bought at the bakery across the street.
Later, I searched my apartment from top to bottom, going through it with a fine-tooth comb to unearth any hidden microphones. I found nothing.
Then I went on the Internet. I typed Igor Dubrovski into Google and with a knot in my stomach launched the search. I found 703 results, most in unknown languages, probably Russian. I scrolled through the search results until I found one in French. The entry was a list of names, each one followed by a percentage: Bernard Vialley 13.4%; Jérôme Cordier 8.9%; Igor Dubrovski 76.2% ...
The URL was societe.com, a site containing financial information on companies. The Igor Dubrovski listed there was probably only someone

 with the same name, but I clicked on the link to be sure. The webpage listed shareholders in a company called Luxares SA. Probably no relation to the Igor Dubrovki I was looking for.
Back to Google and the list of results. Another in French, with the words “Did Dubrovski kill François Littrec?” I shuddered. The information was published on an online news site, lagazettedetoulouse.com. My heart was beating faster and faster as I clicked on the link. Error message. Page can’t be found. Damn. Why don’t people update their links? Back to Google.
I scrolled through listings for other news sites, clicking on articles reporting on what was in all likelihood the same incident. “The Dubrovski Affair: When the accused takes control,” read one post. I clicked on it. The text was a commentary on trial proceedings, but instead of revealing the charges in the case, it described the behavior of Dubrovski at the trial. He had constantly corrected his lawyer and, in the end, had spoken in his place. According to the article, the jurors had been visibly unsettled by his contributions.
The jurors ... So it was a Cours d’Assise, an assize court. That’s the court that hears serious criminal cases, like murder.
I looked at another article, entitled, “Will We Know the Truth One Day?” The journalist explained the reversal of the court’s findings and expressed surprise that a man presented by the police as obviously guilty had managed to sow doubt in the jurors’ minds.
Several other articles said more or less the same thing. All dated from the 1970s, more than 30 years ago. An article from Le Monde was titled “Freud, Wake Up. They’ve Gone Mad!” I clicked on it. It was bylined Jean Calusacq and dated 1976. A long text, it was, above all, a denunciation of the psychiatrist Igor Dubrovski’s methods, described as dangerous. I shuddered. It was him. The author attacked the psychotherapeutic models, American in origin, that were preached by Dubrovski, virulently denouncing the validity of his work. The article left no doubt as to Dubrovski’s guilt: Evidently he had induced young François Littrec to commit suicide under conditions that were still mysterious. Calusacq wanted his head.
I was dismayed. I was in the hands of a dangerous psychiatrist, obviously crazier than the people he was supposed to be treating when he had still been practicing. My God.

 I found other articles. The word acquitted suddenly leapt at me. “Dubrovski Acquitted,” said a headline in Le Parisien. “Dubrovski’s acquittal raises issues for the whole profession,” the article suggested. “How can the court have released a man whose guilt was so obvious?”
Another article wondered if the psychiatrist hadn’t hypnotized the jurors to influence their vote, reporting the disturbing testimony of people who had been present at the hearing. Two others ran headlines about Dubrovski being stripped of his license by the Medical Board, while also denouncing the board for refusing to make public the reasons for the sanctions.
I had read enough.
With a knot in my stomach, I switched my computer off. I had to protect myself and get out of this mess. But how? One thing was sure: It wouldn’t be by trying to carry out the mission impossible Dubreuil had given me.

 33
I HAD BEEN going over all the possibilities in my head for two days without satisfaction. I had to face it: There was nothing I could do as long as the police refused to protect me. Finally I had to admit that my only hope was to convince Dubreuil to retract his demand and give up this final mission. It was the most sensible thing to do. I was going to turn his teaching to good account by using it against him, to make him change his mind.
I constructed a detailed scenario, preparing a series of attitudes, questions, and arguments, anticipating every possible objection and reaction he might have. I spent several days putting the finishing touches on my approach, until I realized that I had been ready for a long time and that my extensive preparations could be explained only as my desire to put off their implementation. Dubreuil frightened me, and I was afraid to go back into his lair and throw myself deliberately into his clutches.
I finalized the plan of action. I decided to turn up unannounced one evening after dinner, at a time when his energy would no doubt be at its lowest but before the departure of the servants.
So I reached the avenue around 9:30 P.M. I got off the bus at the stop before his house, so I could breathe deeply and relax by walking. The lime trees perfumed the air, but the warm air smelled of thunderstorm.
The neighborhood was very quiet, even though a number of July vacationers had returned. In my mind I ran through the different possible scenarios. My chances were slim, but I remained hopeful, impelled by the pressing need to free myself from Dubreuil’s control.
The shadow of the château slowly rose before me as I drew near. The windows on the front were dark. A deathly silence reigned over the place, which seemed deserted. From time to time, lightning streaked the sky.

 I waited, hesitantly, before ringing the bell, peering into the darkness. Suddenly, I heard violent shouting. A woman’s voice. The hall light came on.
“I’m sick of it! I’ve had enough!” cried the woman.
The front door opened, and her silhouette appeared against the light. I was paralyzed, seized by surprise and incomprehension. The young woman who ran down the steps toward me was none other than Audrey. Audrey, my love. Before I could make the slightest movement, the little door next to the gate flew open, and we found ourselves face-to-face. It brought her up short. I saw the amazement on her face.
“Audrey ...”
She didn’t reply, but fixed me with a distraught look.
In the darkening sky, the lightning flashes multiplied.
“Audrey ...”
Tears came to her eyes, as she drew back to escape.
“Audrey ...”
I took a step toward her, overcome by emotion, torn between my
unchanged attraction to her and the unbearable pain of her rejection. She put up a hand to stop me and said between two sobs, “I ...
I can’t.”
The she ran off without turning around.
My pain rapidly turned into violent anger. Forgetting my fear, I threw myself at the door beside the gate. Closed. I called like a madman on the entry phone, pressing the button dozens of times and then keeping my finger pressed on it.
No one replied.
I grasped the gate with both hands and shook as hard as I could, venting my anger, shouting with all my might, my voice covering the flood of barking from Stalin.
“I know you’re there!” I shouted.
I called again, in vain. The storm burst at last; there was a muffled rumble of thunder. The first drops were scattered, then quickly became more intense, and the clouds burst.
 
 Without thinking, I threw myself at the gate again. Propelled by an anger that gave me the energy of ten, I hauled myself up by the strength of my arms and managed to stand on top. I jammed my feet between the spikes and then jumped into the yard.
The bushes cushioned my fall. I got up and rushed to the heavy door, out of breath. I entered the cold entrance hall. Light was coming from the main drawing room. I strode across the hallway, my feet pounding the marble. The noise rang out in the enormous space. I entered the drawing room. The subdued lighting contrasted with my anger. I saw Dubreuil at once. He was sitting at the piano with his back to me, motionless, with his hands on his knees. I was soaked to the skin; water was streaming down my face and my clothes, dripping onto the Persian rug.
“You are angry,” he said as calmly as anything, without turning around. “That’s good. You must never keep your frustration or your resentment to yourself. Go on: Express yourself. Shout if you want.”
His words cut the ground from under my feet. I had planned to shout at him but shouting now would be obeying his command. I felt trapped, my momentum broken. I felt like a marionette whose emotions and actions were being manipulated by someone pulling on invisible strings. I decided to thwart his influence and let my anger burst out.
“What have you done to Audrey?” I screamed. No reply.
“What was she doing here?”
Silence.
“I forbid you to interfere with my love life! Our pact doesn’t give you the right to play with my feelings!”
Still no answer. I noticed Catherine on one of the sofas in the corner of the room.
I went on, “I know you despise love. It doesn’t count for you. The truth is, you’re not capable of loving. You have repeated affairs with women half your age because you’re afraid of abandoning yourself and really loving one of them. It’s great to know how to get what you want in life, to have the courage to assert your will and pursue your dreams. I owe you that, and I acknowledge it’s precious. But it’s pointless if you’re not capable of loving, of loving a person, of loving others in general. You smoke in public places, drive in bus lanes, park on the sidewalk. You despise other people’s well-

 being. But what’s the point of knowing how to get what you want if you cut yourself off from others? You can’t live just for yourself, or else life has no meaning. All the luxuries in the world can never replace the beauty of a relationship, the purity of a feeling, even just the genuine smile of a neighbor or a passerby you hold the door open for, or the touching look of some stranger. Your fine theories are perfect, effective, brilliant even, yet you’re forgetting one thing, just one thing, but it’s essential: You’re forgetting to love.”
I turned around. When I got to the door, I looked back. “And leave Audrey out of this!”

 34
THE NEXT DAY, my rage gradually gave way to the incomprehension that was eating away at me.
The more I advanced, the more inexplicable were the events that followed, and the more enigmatic my relationship with Dubreuil, or rather Dubrovski. How could he have infiltrated my life to that extent? And what was he up to? He wasn’t just a former psychiatrist who wronged his patients. He was dangerous, manipulative, and capable of anything.
Even so, I thought I had put my finger on his weak point: his theories about human relations. For something magical to happen in a relationship, you had to allow yourself to love the other. Love the other. It was the key. The key to all relations, whether friendly or professional. The key that Dubrovski lacked. And which I lacked, too, when it came to convincing my boss. I didn’t like him, and he was bound to feel it. All my efforts were in vain, pointless. I should have found a way of forgiving his hateful behavior enough to like him a little, just a little. And then he might have opened up to me, to my ideas and my proposals. But how do you find the strength to like your worst enemy?
I was still deep in thought and reflections about love, when I caught sight of my old neighbor walking toward me, dressed, as always, in black from head to toe. Since her last visit to my apartment, she had avoided talking to me.
Our eyes met, but she turned away and pretended to be interested in the nearest shop window. Unfortunately, it was the window of a particularly alluring lingerie shop. She found herself staring at G-strings and garter belts displayed on models in very suggestive poses. In the center of the window, where she couldn’t fail to see it, was an enormous poster that revealed the charms of a curvaceous beauty, with the advice given by a famous brand of

 underwear: “Lesson number 36: Give your angular form some curves.” She abruptly turned her head away and walked on, eyes on the ground.
“Hello, Madame Blanchard!” I called out gaily.
She slowly looked up.
“Good day, Monsieur Greenmor,” she said, blushing slightly, no doubt
remembering our last encounter.
“How are you?” I asked.
“Well, thank you.”
“Lovely day, isn’t it? Makes a change from last night.”
“Yes, you’re right. Now that I see you, I must tell you: I’m sending
around a petition about our neighbor on the fourth floor. Her cat walks along the ledge and goes into people’s apartments. The other day, I found it lying on my sofa. It’s quite unacceptable.”
“Her little gray cat?”
“Yes. As for Monsieur Robert, I’ve had enough of his cooking smells. He could at least close the window when he’s cooking. I’ve already talked to the managing agent three times, but I’m the only one who’s complained.”
Right. Let’s change the subject. I so wanted to get her onto something positive. “You’re out shopping?”
“No, I’m going to church.”
“On a weekday?”
“I go every day, Monsieur Greenmor,” she said with pride.
“Why every day?”
“Well, why do you think? To tell the Lord Jesus of the love I have for
him.”
“You go to church every day to tell Jesus you love him?”
“Yes.”
I hesitated a second.
“You know, Madame Blanchard, I must tell you.”
“What?”
“I have ... how shall I put it? I have doubts.”
“Doubts, Monsieur Greenmor? Doubts about what?”
“Well, I don’t know if you are a good Christian.”
She froze, stung to the quick, and then started to shake, red in the face.
“How dare you!”
“Well, I don’t think you’re following Jesus’s teaching.”

 “Of course I am!”
“I’m not a scholar, but I don’t remember Jesus ever saying ‘Love me.’ On the other hand, I’m certain he said, ‘Love one another.’”
She stared at me, dumbstruck.
“However,” I said, “I acknowledge that you follow Jesus’s orders to ‘love your neighbor as you would yourself.’”
She looked at me uncomprehendingly.
Then, very gently and sincerely, I asked her, “Madame Blanchard, why don’t you love yourself?”

 35
TWO IN THE morning. I would never get back to sleep, endlessly turning over the same thought in my mind. I didn’t know what Dubrovski really wanted.
And that list of shareholders with his name on it that I’d seen online? Was it really just someone with the same name? Suppose it was him? I should have looked at it more closely. What was that company? Luxores? Luxares? Something like that.
I got up, crossed the bedroom, and sat down at my computer. I typed Dubrovski’s name into Google. Again, the results in Russian came up on the screen. I scrolled through the entries until I came to the one with the list of names followed by percentages. I clicked on the link. Luxares SA—that was the company whose majority shareholder was an Igor Dubrovski. I copied the company name into the Google search box and clicked Enter. Just 23 results: newspaper sites, financial sites, and then luxares.fr, the link for the company’s site, “Restoration company specializes ..., “ I read. I opened the page.
I couldn’t help recoiling, stupefied by what filled the screen. It was a panoramic photo, shot at night. In the foreground were those familiar metal girders and behind them, picture windows, lit from inside, revealing the luxurious interior of the Jules Verne.

 36
I WAS FRIGHTENED. It was no longer the slight apprehension that had been with me since the beginning of our pact but a terror that gnawed at me and wouldn’t leave. The man who had taken control of my life was all the more dangerous for being rich and powerful. Now I had only one obsession: getting out of his clutches.
I called the policeman again, telling him about my discovery and insisting I get police protection. He repeated that all I had was just a bundle of suspicions—worrying, admittedly, but there was not even the hint of a crime. He could do nothing for me.
I had searched in vain for all feasible ways of freeing myself. The only more or less realistic idea had been to try and negotiate with Dubrovski. Audrey’s presence had squashed that plan, and now I no longer had the courage to go back there, after the scene I had caused. I had insulted him in the presence of Catherine, and he wasn’t the sort to forgive easily.
I had to face reality. My only hope for ending the pact was to accomplish the final trial he had given me—a task that was impossible. I was caught in his trap, cornered.
The following two days were torture. I desperately sought a solution. My nights were disturbed, sleep impossible. At work I had terrible difficulty concentrating on my interviews. Alice said I looked like a ghost and advised me to see a doctor as quickly as possible. I was on a downward spiral.
On the evening of the second day, as I turned around to go back to the office to get my wallet, which I’d forgotten, I caught sight of Vladi, who just happened to be a few yards behind me on the Avenue de l’Opéra. My fear went up a notch.
The following night, I had a strange dream. It took place in America, on a farm in Mississippi. A frog had fallen into a vat of cream. The sides of the

 vat were very high, and the frog was trapped, unable to get a footing in the cream. There was no possibility of escape; its fate was sealed. All the frog could do was wait to die. But it was too stupid to understand this obvious truth, and it continued to struggle as hard as it could, without thinking how futile its actions were. The frog struggled so much that finally it churned the cream into butter. Now the frog had something solid to stand on. It leapt out of the vat and regained its freedom.
In the wee hours of the night, I made up my mind. I was going to fight tooth and nail to take my CEO’s place.