THE SOFT, WARM night enveloped me. It was taking me in its arms, carrying me. I could feel my body melting into it, as if I were already floating in the air.
One more step ...
I wasn’t afraid. And I didn’t want fear to arise suddenly and hold me back, spoiling everything.
I had imagined hearing the hubbub of the city, so I was surprised by the peace and quiet. Not silence, no, but peace and quiet. All the sounds that reached me were gentle, distant, soothing.
One little step ...
Slowly, very slowly, I walked along the steel beam that the lights had transformed into dark gold. That night, the Eiffel Tower and I were as one. I was walking on gold, breathing in air that was warm and damp, with a strange scent that was enticing, intoxicating. Beneath me, 360 feet below, lay Paris, offering herself to me. Her twinkling lights were so many winking, calling eyes. Patiently, aware she was irresistible, she was waiting for my blood to come and fertilize her.
One more step ...
I had thought it all out and carefully prepared for what I was about to do. I had chosen it, accepted it, made it part of me. Very calmly, I had made up my mind to end a life that was devoid of purpose or meaning, that no longer offered anything that was worth the trouble.
One step ...
My life was a string of failures that had begun even before my birth. My father—if that’s what you can call the vulgar progenitor—had not even judged me worthy of knowing him. He had left my mother as soon as she told him she was pregnant.
 Was it with the intention of getting rid of me that she had tried to drown her despair in a Paris bar? The many drinks she had consumed with the American businessman she met there did not, however, cloud her mind. He was 39; she was 26. She was anxious; his relaxed air reassured her. He seemed well off; she was struggling to survive. She gave herself to him that night, calculatingly and with hope. The next morning, she was tender and loving, and I will never know if it was sincerely or out of weakness that he said yes, of course, if ever she became pregnant, he wanted her to keep the child and stay by his side.
She followed him to the United States, and in the land of excess, nobody was surprised that I came into the world at seven-and-a-half months already weighing nearly six-and-a-half pounds. I was given an American name, and so I became Alan Greenmor, an American citizen. My mother learned English and managed as best she could to adapt to life in her adopted country. But things took a tragic turn. Five years after they arrived, my new father lost his job, and, unable to find another one during the pre-Reagan economic crisis, he spiraled down into alcoholism. He became bad- tempered, uncommunicative, and depressed. My mother was disgusted by his lack of initiative and constantly criticized him for his spinelessness. Deeply resentful, she continually looked for ways to provoke him, using the slightest transgression as an excuse to criticize him. His lack of reaction led her to increase the attacks, heaping on more and more insults. She seemed to derive some satisfaction when he at last got angry, preferring his anger to his apathy. I was terrified by her game. I loved my parents and couldn’t bear to see them destroying each other. My father’s fits of anger were rare but explosive, and I feared them as much as my mother desired them. When she at last got a reaction from him, she had an adversary, a man who could stand up for himself. She finally had an outlet for her built-up resentment, and she really lashed out with her tongue. One evening, my father beat her, and I was less traumatized by his violence than by the perverse pleasure I read on my mother’s face. One night, during a particularly terrible argument, my mother flung in his face that I was not really his son—a fact that I became aware of at the same time. He left the house the next day and was never seen again. My second father had left me as well.
My mother struggled to keep us alive. She worked long hours, six days a week, in a laundry. She brought its chemical smells home every night.

 When she came to kiss me at bedtime, I no longer recognized my mother’s much-loved scent, the scent that before had reassured me, inviting me to sleep as it enveloped me in tenderness.
One step, then another ...
After my father left, my mother went from one low-level job to another, believing each time that she could rise up through the ranks, get a promotion, and earn more. She also went from lover to lover, with the hope of keeping one and setting up a home. I think one day she realized that all these hopes about her life were futile, and that is when she focused everything on me. I would succeed where she had failed. I would earn so much money that she would be wealthy, too. From that moment, my education became her absolute priority. I was ordered to bring home good grades. At meals, our conversation revolved around school, the teachers, my results. My mother became my trainer; I was her colt. Speaking French with her and English with the rest of the world, I had been bilingual from birth. She repeated endlessly that this was a major asset. I was sure to become an international businessman or a great interpreter. She even imagined me as Secretary of State. Only losers have no ambition, she said. I was very afraid of disappointing her, so I worked as hard as I could in school, getting good marks. But my success only increased her expectations of me; it confirmed that her strategy was working.
It was a terrible blow the day my mother learned that in the United States a college education isn’t free. It costs money, and top dollar at that. It was the first time I ever saw her downcast. All her plans were destroyed. Perhaps she really was cursed, but it didn’t take long for her natural character to regain the upper hand. She made an appointment with the principal of my school to convince him that a young American citizen shouldn’t be left by the wayside when his high grades were evidence of how he might serve his country if he were given access to the lofty positions a college education would ensure. There must be a solution, she said. Weren’t there scholarships or grants or something? She came home from the meeting all fired up. It was very simple, she said. There was a six- letter answer: sports. If I was very good at sports, there was a good chance a college would waive its tuition, just to get me on its team and increase its chances of winning tournaments.

 And so, without ever daring to admit to my mother that I loathed sports, I was subjected to an intensive training regime. She pushed me, motivated me, encouraged me, continually scrutinizing my results. Now she seemed unconcerned about my grades. “Where there’s a will, there’s a way,” she would repeat nonstop. In the end, it was baseball that I turned out to be least bad at. From then on, I lived for baseball. To motivate me, she pinned posters of the stars on the Detroit Tigers to my bedroom wall. I drank my breakfast milk from a mug with a picture of the Tigers on it. There were Tigers everywhere: on my key ring, my T-shirts, my socks, my bathrobe, my pens. I ate Tigers, I wrote Tigers, I washed Tigers, I even slept Tigers. Baseball haunted my dreams. My mother had succeeded in sponsoring my brain, sliding billboards into my thoughts. She enrolled me in Little League and worked overtime to pay the dues. I spent three hours a day minimum, five on weekends, playing baseball. The coach’s shouts still ring in my ears, all these years later. I hated the sport but I loved my mother, and I would have done anything not to disappoint her. She had spent her life keeping her hopes up, and I had the impression she would stop living the day she had nothing more to hope for.
The future proved me right. My mother died several years later, just after my graduation from business school. I found myself alone, holding an MBA that I hadn’t really wanted, having spent my school years rubbing shoulders with young people whose tastes and aspirations I didn’t share. I was offered a job as deputy head of the suppliers’ accounts department of a large company. The salary was good, but the work soon turned out to be uninteresting. I wasn’t really disappointed, however, as I wasn’t expecting anything. My mother’s life had taught me at an early age that hopes were futile.
One more step ...
After a few years of an empty, pointless life, I left for France, almost on a whim. Was it an unconscious desire to reconnect with my origins, or was I trying to undo the legacy of my mother’s miserable life by going in the opposite direction? I don’t know. At any rate, I found myself in Paris and decided to stay. The city is beautiful but that wasn’t the reason. There was something else: an intuition or a premonition that my destiny lay there.
At the time, I didn’t know that I would want to die there so soon.

 I looked for a job, and got an interview at Dunker Consulting, a recruitment agency that searched for accounts managers for big companies. The interviewer told me I was unemployable in France, as French accounts were kept according to very different regulations than American ones. “You might as well start qualifying again from scratch,” he had said, laughing at a joke only he could see. On the other hand, he said that my overall knowledge of accounting, along with my American background, made me a desirable candidate to become a recruitment consultant in their firm. Their main clients were large American companies that would appreciate having their recruitment handled by an American. “Impossible,” I told him. “Recruitment is not my thing. I know absolutely nothing about it.” The interviewer gave me a knowing smile, like the experienced older man faced with the embarrassed young woman who admits at the last minute that she is still a virgin. “We’ll take care of that,” he said.
So I was hired and spent the first two weeks in intensive training, along with other young recruits who were going to contribute to the firm’s sustained development. Our average age was 30, which seemed to me extremely young to be practicing this profession. Evaluating the qualities and aptitudes of a candidate amounted to judging a human being, and I was nervous at having to assume such a responsibility. Apparently my fellow trainees didn’t share my fear; they obviously enjoyed slipping into the respected role of the recruiter. The shared feeling in the group was of belonging to a certain elite. Pride left no room for doubt.
For two weeks, we were taught the tricks of the trade: a simple but sensible method for conducting recruitment interviews, as well as a string of gimmicky techniques that I think of today as so much nonsense. I learned that after welcoming a candidate, you were to stay silent for a few moments. If the applicant started speaking on his own, you were probably dealing with a leader. If he patiently waited to be asked a question, his reserve fit the profile of a follower. We were to invite the recruit to introduce himself in a very open way—“Tell me about yourself”—without asking specific questions from the outset. If the candidate launched off on his own, it showed he was independent. If he asked us where we wanted him to begin—should he start with his education, for example, or go back in time from his most recent employment—then he lacked initiative.

 We practiced applying the techniques in role-playing exercises conducted in pairs. One of us played the role of the recruiter while the other put himself in the place of the candidate, inventing a background and a career so that we could practice holding interviews and asking questions to expose the “truth” about the candidate. What was most surprising to me was the competitive atmosphere that prevailed during these exercises. Everyone tried to trap their partner, who was seen alternately as a liar to be unmasked or an enemy to be deceived. The funniest thing was that the trainer, a salaried consultant with Dunker Consulting, entered into the competition as well, taking particular pleasure in highlighting omissions or blunders. “You’re being had!” was his favorite phrase, spoken in a mocking voice, as he supervised the role plays, gliding among the pairs as we practiced. The insinuation was that he would have known how to handle the situation.
At the end of two weeks, we were pronounced fit for service.
I found myself spending my days behind a desk listening to timid men telling me about their careers, their faces red with fright as they tried to make me believe that their three main shortcomings were perfectionism, too much accuracy, and a tendency to work too hard. They were miles away from suspecting that I was even more timid than they were and even more ill at ease. I was just a bit luckier than them because my role gave me an advantage that was far from insignificant: I got others to speak rather than speaking myself. But each time I undertook a search, I dreaded the moment when I would be forced to tell nine candidates out of ten that their applications didn’t fit the required profile. I felt like I was pronouncing a prison sentence. My unease increased theirs, which reinforced mine, in a hellish vicious circle. I was suffocating in the role, and the atmosphere within the company did nothing to lighten my mood. The human values on display were only a façade. The daily reality was tough, cold, competitive.
It was Audrey who allowed me to survive in this situation. I met her one Sunday afternoon at Mariage Frères on the Rue des Grands Augustins. I only had to set foot in this place to feel soothed. As soon as I opened the door, the first step on the old oak flooring plunged me into the refined atmosphere of a tea merchant’s shop in the days of the French colonial empire. I was bewitched by the mixed fragrances of the hundreds of teas stored in immense antique jars; their scents transported me in a flash to the Far East of the 19th century.

 It was while I was ordering a quarter of a pound of Sakura from the young man behind the counter that a voice whispered in my ear that the Sakura Impérial was finer. I turned around, surprised that a stranger was talking to me in this city where everyone seemed to be encased in their own bubble, haughtily ignoring everyone else. Her exact words were: “You don’t believe me? Come and taste for yourself.” Taking me by the hand, she led me across the room, weaving through the customers and the displays of teapots from faraway places to the little staircase that climbed to the tasting room. Here the ambiance was intimate, elegant. Waiters in colored raw silk suits glided silently between the tables with a ceremonious attitude. In my casual clothes, I was an anachronism. We sat in a corner at a little table with a white cloth, set with silver cutlery and china cups bearing the Mariage Frères crest. Audrey ordered two teas, hot scones, and a coup de soleil, or strawberries-and-cream tart—the specialty she said I absolutely had to try. (I immediately enjoyed our conversation. She was a fine arts student and lived in a garret in the Latin Quarter. “You’ll see, it’s really nice,” she told me, thereby indicating that our meeting would not stop at the door to Mariage Frères.)
Her room was indeed charming—minute, with a sloping ceiling made of old beams and a skylight that looked out on a succession of gray roofs angled in every direction. All it needed was a crescent moon to be something straight out Henry James’s novel, The Aristocrats. She undressed with a natural grace, and I immediately loved her body, which had a delicacy I was not used to. Her shoulders and arms were exquisitely slender, nothing like those of American girls brought up on cornflakes and intensive sports. Her white, white skin contrasted with her dark hair, and her breasts —my God, her breasts were sublime, simply sublime. Fifty times during the night I thanked her for not wearing perfume, as I delighted in the voluptuous scent of her skin at every point of her body, intoxicating like a drug. That night will remain engraved in my memory beyond my death.
We woke up the next morning entwined. I ran to fetch croissants and breathlessly climbed back up the six stories to her room. I threw myself into her arms, and we made love again. For the first time in my life I was experiencing happiness. It was a new, strange sensation. I was far from suspecting that this happiness foreshadowed the fall from which I would not get up.

 For four months my life was centered on Audrey. She occupied my thoughts during the day and my dreams at night. Her schedule at art school was full of openings that left her available. During the week, we would often meet during the day. I would use a client meeting as an excuse and spend an hour or two with her in a hotel room that we rented nearby. I felt a bit guilty. Just a bit. Happiness makes you selfish.
One day, I was in my office when Vanessa, the departmental secretary, called to say that my candidate had arrived. I was expecting no one but as my organizational skills left room for improvement, just to be safe I asked her to send the candidate up. I would rather see someone for nothing than give Vanessa proof of my lack of organization; my boss would have known in less than half an hour. I waited at the door to my office and nearly fainted when, at the end of the corridor, I saw Vanessa escorting Audrey, who was dressed as a caricature of an accountant, in a skimpy suit and metal-rimmed glasses that I’d never seen on her before, with her hair in a ponytail. A real cliché, borderline grotesque. As I thanked Vanessa, my voice stuck in my throat. I closed my door behind Audrey. She took her glasses off with a suggestive look, her lips in a slight pout. I immediately knew what she intended. I swallowed hard and felt a wave of fright pass through my body. I knew her enough to know that nothing would stop her.
That day the conference table became a piece of furniture that I would never see in the same way again. I was scared stiff that someone would find us. She was crazy, but I loved it.
When Audrey left me four months later, my life stopped at once. Without the slightest suspicion beforehand, one evening I took a little envelope out of the mailbox. Inside was one word, just one, in her very recognizable handwriting: Good-bye. I stood rooted to the spot in the hall of my apartment building, in front of the mailbox. My blood froze in my veins. My head was throbbing. I was nearly sick. I collapsed into the old wooden elevator, which discharged me at my floor, where I entered my apartment in a state of shock. Everything was swaying around me. I fell onto the sofa and sobbed. After a long while, I sat up and told myself it was impossible, quite simply impossible. It must be a practical joke or something. I grabbed my phone and tried to call her. I listened to her voice mail a hundred times and, each time, her voice seemed a little more neutral, more distant, colder.

 I gave up when her machine reached saturation point and stopped taking messages.
Slowly, a distant but familiar feeling emerged from deep inside me, gradually rising to the surface. It was natural, the feeling said, quite natural that I should be left. That was the way it was. You don’t fight your destiny, Alan.
It was at that moment that I realized my death was self-evident. It wasn’t an impulse. I wouldn’t have jumped under a train. No, it was just something obvious that imposed itself on me. I was going to pass to the other side, and everything would be fine. It was up to me to choose the place, the time; there was no hurry. It wasn’t a morbid, masochistic desire. Not at all. And it wasn’t just a desire to put an end to my suffering, however great that was. No, the beyond was drawing me, gently, irresistibly, and I had the strange feeling that my place was there, that my soul would flower there. My life on earth had no reason to be. I had had the conceit to cling to it, to pretend that all was well, and life had sent me Audrey to make me experience an unbearable pain and in this way to face my destiny at last.
The place was suggested to me by my memory, and it’s no doubt not pure chance that it had been kept there, in one of my memory’s mysterious compartments. Some time before I had read, in a magazine left behind by Audrey, a controversial article by someone named Dubrovski. In it, the author laid out his theory on the right to suicide, and his idea that, if you were going to commit suicide, you might as well do it properly. He described a suitable place for what he poetically called “the flight of one’s life”—the Eiffel Tower. It is totally secure, he explained, except at one point that it’s useful to know. You have to go up to the Jules Verne, the luxury restaurant on the second floor, go into the ladies’ room, then open the little door marked Private to the left of the washbasin. It leads to a tiny room that serves as a broom cupboard. The window in there is not barred and opens directly onto the girders. I remembered these details as though I had read them that very morning. Dying at the Eiffel Tower had something grand about it. Revenge for a mediocre life.
One more step ...
I had to walk far enough along the beam to reach a suitable point where there was no metal structure below me to impede my fall.

 I was leaving nothing behind me, not a friend, not a relative, not a pleasure, nothing that could make me regret my action. I was ready, in my head and in my body.
One last step ...
That’s it. The right place. I stood still. Consciousness was already beginning to leave me. I took a deep breath and slowly pivoted on my heels to the right, toward the abyss that I didn’t look into but whose presence, whose beauty, I could feel.
I was on a level with the flywheel of the Jules Verne’s private elevator. Three yards of nothingness separated us. From where I was, I could see only the grooved edge holding the cable, as it circled the wheel, then plunged into the void. The void. The windows of the restaurant were on the other side of the tower. Nobody could see me. No noise from the restaurant reached me. I heard nothing but a gentle humming, the sound of the night. Those shimmering lights in the distance were drawing me, hypnotizing me. The warm, intoxicating air was flooding me with supernatural well-being. Most of my thoughts had left me. I no longer inhabited my body. I was no longer me. I was merging with space, life, death. I no longer existed as a separate being. I was life. I ...
A cough ...
In a flash, it brought me out of the state I was in, just as the snapping of a hypnotist’s fingers breaks his patient’s trance.
To my right, at the end of the girder, stood a man looking me straight in the eyes. About 60, with silver-gray hair, wearing a dark suit. His eyes, lit by the reflection from one of the tower’s lights, seemed to emerge from a void. All my life I’ll remember those eyes, a steely blue to freeze your blood.
A feeling of anger mixed with my surprise. I had taken every precaution not to be seen. I was certain I had not been followed. I felt as if I were in a bad film, in which a rescuer miraculously arrives at just the right moment to prevent a suicide.
I had made a mess of my life. Others had taken control of it, but my death belonged to me. To me alone. There was no question of me allowing someone to hold me back, to convince me with soothing words that life was beautiful all the same, or that others were unhappier than me, or I don’t know what. In any case, no one could understand, and what’s more, I

 wasn’t asking for anything. More than anything in the world, I wanted to be alone. Alone.
“Leave me alone. I’m a free man. I’m doing what I want. Go away.”
He watched me in silence, and right away I had the feeling that something wasn’t right. He looked relaxed. Yes, that’s it, relaxed!
He raised his cigar to his mouth, calmly.
“Go on. Jump!”
I was stunned by his words. I was expecting anything but that. Who was
this guy? A weirdo? He wanted to see me fall and get off on it? Shit! It had to happen to me! But this can’t be! What had I done to God, for crying out loud? I was incensed. It was not possible, not possible, not ...
“What are you waiting for?” he asked in a terribly tranquil tone. “Jump!”
The situation left me completely at a loss. My thoughts were knocking into each other without managing to come together. Struggling, I managed to say few words.
“Who are you? What do you want from me?”
He drew on his cigar and held the smoke in his mouth for a while, before exhaling it in thin coils that vanished before they reached me. His eyes riveted on mine paralyzed me. This guy had enough charisma to bend the Eiffel Tower.
“You’re angry. But you are suffering a lot deep inside yourself,” he said in a very calm voice, with a light accent that I didn’t recognize.
“That’s not hard to guess.”
“You’re atrociously unhappy and can’t bear to go on living.”
His words troubled me and made me feel my pain. I nodded. The silence
weighed on me.
“Let’s say I’ve had big problems all my life.”
A slow, very slow puff on the cigar.
“There are no big problems. There are only little people.”
A wave of anger rose up in me. I could feel my blood beating in my
temples, which were burning hot. I swallowed hard.
“It’s easy to take advantage of my situation to humiliate me. Who do you
think you are? Of course, I suppose you know how to solve all your problems?”
With incredible self-assurance, he replied: “Yes, I do. And other people’s problems as well.”

 I was beginning to feel ill. Now I was fully conscious of being surrounded by the void. I was beginning to be afraid. Fear had finally found me and was worming its way inside. My hands were moist. I absolutely mustn’t look down.
He went on: “It’s true that by jumping your problems will disappear with you. But the situation isn’t as fair as that... .”
“What do you mean?”
“Once again, you’re the one who’s going to suffer. Your problems won’t feel anything. As a solution, this is not very balanced.”
“You don’t suffer jumping from a tower. The collision is so violent that you simply stop living without having time to feel anything. No pain. I’ve informed myself.”
He quietly laughed.
“What’s making you laugh?”
“That’s true—if you start from the hypothesis that you are still alive at
the moment you hit the ground. That’s where you’re wrong. Nobody arrives down there alive.”
A long draw on the cigar. I felt more and more ill. Dizzy. I needed to sit down.
“The truth is,” he went on, taking his time, “they all die during the fall from a heart attack provoked by horror, the abominable horror of the fall and the unbearable vision of the ground coming nearer at one hundred and fifty miles an hour. They are struck down by an atrocious fright that makes them spew out their innards before their heart explodes. Their eyes are bulging out of their sockets at the moment of death.”
My legs were shaking. I nearly fainted. My head was spinning. I felt extremely sick. Don’t look down, I told myself. Definitely not. Stay standing straight up. Concentrate on him. Don’t take your eyes off him.
“Perhaps,” he said after a silence, speaking slowly, “perhaps I have something to propose to you.”
I stayed silent, hanging on his words.
“A sort of deal between us,” he continued, leaving his words floating in the air.
“A deal?” I stuttered.
“Here’s how it is: You remain alive, and I’ll look after you. I’ll set you back on the right road, make you a man capable of leading his life, of

 solving his problems, and even being happy. In exchange ...”
He drew another puff on his cigar.
“In exchange, you’ll do everything I tell you to. You promise on your
life.”
His words were highly disturbing and added to my unease. I had to make
a considerable effort to concentrate, collect my wits, and think. “What do you mean by ‘promise on my life’?”
Silence.
“You must respect the contract.”
“Otherwise?”
“Otherwise you will not remain alive.”
“I’d have to be mad to accept a deal like that!”
“What have you got to lose?”
“Why would I place my life in the hands of a stranger in exchange for a
hypothetical happiness?”
His face showed the confidence of a chess player who knows that his
opponent is in check.
“And down there, what will you obtain in exchange for your certain
death?” he said, pointing to the void with the tip of his cigar.
I made the mistake of looking in that direction and was gripped by violent vertigo. The vision terrified me, yet at the same time, the void was calling to me, as if to free me from the awful anguish that was overcoming me. I wanted to lie down along the girder and stay there without moving, waiting for him to help me. Uncontrollable nervous shivers went up and
down my limbs. It was awful, unbearable.
Rain ...
Rain was starting to fall. Rain. My God, the metal girder was going to be like a skating rink. There were five yards between me and the man, the window, safety. Five yards of narrow and slippery girder. I had to concentrate. Yes, that’s it, concentrate. Above all, stay upright. Breathe in. I had to turn gently to the right, but my legs wouldn’t move. It was as if my feet were stuck to the metal. Staying too long in that position had frozen my muscles, and now they weren’t responding. Vertigo was an evil sorcerer that had bewitched its victim. My legs started trembling, at first imperceptibly, then more and more violently. My strength was abandoning me.
The wheel ...

The wheel was turning. The noise of the elevator beginning to move. The wheel began to throw off water. The rotation accelerated, and I could hear the elevator going down, faster and faster. The water hit me, cold and blinding. Deafening. I lost my balance and found myself crouched down, clinging to the girder, still attacked by the cascading water. Through the din I heard the man shouting in a commanding tone:
“Come over here! Keep your eyes open! Put one foot in front of the other!”
I obeyed, submitting to his authority, forcing myself to only listen to his orders and forget my thoughts and my emotions, even though they were overwhelming. I took a step, then a second, like a robot, mechanically executing each of his commands. I managed to extricate myself from the waterfall, then to walk, in a trance, until I was level with him. I lifted a foot to climb over the horizontal beam that separated me from him, but he gripped the trembling, dripping hand I was holding out and stopped me in my tracks, pushing me back. I nearly staggered into the void, unbalanced by his force. But his iron grip held me immobile.
“Right. Is it a deal?”
The water was streaming down his face, guided by his wrinkles. His blue eyes were fascinating.
“Yes.”