
I really didn’t know what to expect and was rather worried.
I grabbed my phone and called Vanessa to ask her to cancel all my appointments for the day. I told her I was unwell and didn’t know when I would be back. That chore done, I dashed into the shower and stayed there until the hot water tank was empty.
I lived in a one-bedroom apartment I rented in Montmartre. The rent was high and the space limited, but I had an unobstructed view over the city. When I was feeling down, I could sit for hours on the windowsill, allowing my eyes to wander to the horizon over the multitude of buildings and monuments spread out below me. I imagined the millions of people who lived in all those buildings: their stories, their occupations. There were so many of them that at any hour of the day or night there was bound to be some working, some sleeping, some making love, some dying, some arguing, some waking up. I would say “beep” and wonder how many people, at that precise moment, had burst out laughing, had said good-bye to their partner, had burst into tears, had breathed their last, had given birth,
 had been struck by lightning. I tried to imagine the very different emotions that each one could be feeling at the same moment, at the same time.
I rented my apartment from an elderly woman, Madame Blanchard, who, unfortunately for me, lived in the apartment just below mine. She had been a widow for the last 20 years but gave the impression she was still in mourning. A fervent Catholic, she went to mass several times a week. I sometimes imagined her kneeling down in the old wooden confessional at Saint-Pierre de Montmartre church, confessing through the grill in a low voice the malicious gossip she had proffered the day before. Perhaps she confessed the harassment she subjected me to as well. As soon as I made the slightest noise above the accepted norm—that is to say, complete silence—she would come up and knock vigorously on my door. I would open the door partway and see her infuriated face formulating exaggerated criticisms and inviting me to show more respect for my neighbors. Unfortunately, age had not made her lose her hearing, and I wondered how she could hear such insignificant noises as a ball rolling or a glass set down a little clumsily on the coffee table. I imagined her perched on an old stepladder, with a doctor’s stethoscope held against her ceiling, frowning as she listened for the slightest trace of noise.
She had agreed to rent me the apartment reluctantly and not without alerting me to the favor she was granting me. Normally, she didn’t rent to foreigners, but as her husband had been freed by the Americans during World War II, she had made an exception for me that I had to show myself worthy of.
It goes without saying that Audrey had never stayed over. I would have been afraid to see the agents of the Inquisition burst in, in their dark robes, faces hidden by the shadow of their hoods, and put us to the question, then hanging Audrey naked and chained hand and foot, from the hook in the ceiling for a chandelier, as the flames of a crackling fire began to lick at her body.
That morning, I went out—without banging the door—and ran down the five stories of my apartment building. I hadn’t felt so light since my separation from Audrey. And yet I had no objective reason for feeling better. Nothing had changed in my life. Wait, yes, it had: Someone was interested in me, and whatever his intentions, that was perhaps enough to soothe my suffering. Admittedly, I did have a little knot in my stomach, like

 the stage fright I experienced before going to the office on those rare occasions when I would have to speak in public.
As I went out, I came across Étienne, the neighborhood vagrant. From the entrance hall, a small flight of stone steps went down to the street. Étienne was in the habit of hiding underneath it. He must be a real matter for Madame Blanchard’s conscience, no doubt divided between her Christian charity and her passion for order. That morning, Étienne, his hair unkempt, had come out of his hole and was leaning against the wall of the building, sunning himself.
“Lovely day,” I threw out as I went past.
“If ye says so, sonny,” he replied in his rasping voice.
I ran down into the Métro, and the sight of all those depressed faces
going to work as though they were going to the abattoir almost brought back my melancholy from the day before.
I got out at the Rue de la Pompe station and came up into the smart part of Paris. I was immediately struck by the contrast between the fetid smell of the dark underground corridors of the Métro and the fresh air, the green scent of this luminous district. The few cars on the street and the proximity of the Bois de Boulogne were no doubt the reason for the clean air. The Avenue Henri Martin is a wide avenue, with four rows of trees down the center and on either side, and sumptuous mid-19th-century houses in carved stone, set back behind high, ornate railings of black and gold.
I was very early for my appointment, so I went into a café to have breakfast. It smelled of hot croissants and coffee. I sat down near the window and waited. The waiter didn’t seem particularly busy, but when I gestured to him I had the impression he was pretending not to see me. Finally, I called and he came over, grumbling. I ordered a hot chocolate and bread and butter, and while I waited, leafed through a copy of Le Figaro that was lying on the table. When the steaming chocolate came, I threw myself on the deliciously buttered slices of fresh baguette, overhearing bits of local gossip being passed around at the bar. Parisian cafés have an ambiance and smells that you don’t get in the States.
I set off again half an hour later. The Avenue Henri Martin is quite long, and as I went along I thought about Yves Dubreuil. What had led the man to propose this strange deal? Was his intention really positive, as he assured me it was? His attitude had been ambiguous, to say the least, and it was

 difficult to trust him. Now, as I drew close to his house, I felt a growing anxiety.
I counted off the numbers as I went past apartment buildings, each more handsome than the last. I reached number 25 and looked for 23, which should be next, but here the series was interrupted. Thick foliage behind the railings hid the building. I arrived at the gate. Number 23 wasn’t an apartment building but a magnificent stone mansion. Immense. I got out the visiting card to check. Very impressive. Was this really his house?
I rang. The little camera behind the glass in the videophone went into action, and a woman’s voice invited me to go in, as a door next to the gate opened electronically. I had scarcely walked a few steps into the garden when an enormous black Doberman launched itself in my direction, barking, its eyes threatening and its fangs lubricated by saliva. I was getting ready to leap to one side when the chain around its neck suddenly tightened. It was held back at the last moment, its front paws in the air, the strangulation this provoked propelling from its mouth a stream of slobber that hit my shoes. The dog immediately turned around and went silent, as if the fright it had just inflicted on me was enough to satisfy it.
“Please forgive Stalin,” Dubreuil said as he welcomed me at the front door. “He is hateful!”
“He’s called Stalin?” I stuttered, as I shook his hand, my pulse at 140.
“We only let him out at night, so during the day he stretches his paws from time to time, when we have a visitor. He terrorizes my guests a bit, but that makes them more conciliatory! Come on, follow me,” he said, going before me into a vast marble hall where his voice immediately rang out.
The ceiling was impressively high. On the walls hung gigantic old master paintings in frames of antique gold.
A liveried servant took my jacket. Dubreuil started up the stairs, and I followed. It was a monumental staircase in white stone. Above it was an imposing chandelier with black crystal prisms that must have been three times my weight. Reaching the first floor, Dubreuil swept along a wide corridor, its walls lined with tapestries and more paintings, lit by crystal sconces. It was like a château.
Dubreuil walked with confidence and spoke in a loud voice, as if I was ten yards away. His dark suit contrasted with his silvery hair. Stray locks of

hair made him look like a fiery conductor. His white shirt was open at the neck, showing a silk cravat.
“Let’s go into my office. It’ll be more private.”
Privacy was exactly what I needed in this place, which, although magnificent, was not really conducive to intimate conversations.
His office did indeed seem cozier. The walls lined with antique bookcases full of books, most of them old, warmed the room. The parquet floor was partially hidden under a thick Persian rug. Heavy dark red curtains completed the muffled atmosphere. In front of the window was an imposing mahogany desk inlaid with gold-tooled black leather. The top was piled with books and files and, in the center, a large, threatening, silver paper knife, its tip turned toward me, like a murder weapon carelessly left behind by the killer in his haste to quit the scene. Dubreuil invited me to sit down in one of the two large, brown leather armchairs that faced each other on one side of the desk.
“Would you like a drink?” he asked me as he poured himself a glass of bourbon.
“No, thanks. Not at the moment.”
He sat down calmly and took a sip while I waited to learn what, exactly, would be my fate.
“Right, listen. Here’s what I propose. Today, first and foremost, you will tell me your life. You said you had had plenty of problems. I want to know everything. Let’s not play the timid maiden; don’t be afraid of confiding in me. In any case, rest assured that I’ve heard enough sordid things in my life not to be shocked or surprised by anything. But, conversely, don’t feel obliged to lay it on to justify the act you wanted to commit yesterday. I just want to understand your personal history.”
He fell silent and took another sip.
There is something shameless about telling your life story to a stranger, when you go beyond the trivial details of your existence, such as work, everyday encounters, and daily routines. I was afraid of confiding in him, as though exposing myself amounted to giving him power over me. After a while, I got started and no longer questioned what I was doing. I accepted revealing myself, perhaps because I didn’t feel judged. And then I must admit I was hooked. After all, it’s rather pleasant, when you’ve passed the barrier of propriety, to have an attentive ear at one’s disposal.