“WHAT MOTIVATES YOU about a job in accounting?”
My candidate’s eyes moved rapidly in every direction as he searched for the best possible answer.
“Hmm ... I like figures.”
I could feel he was disappointed with himself. He would like to have said something catchier, but nothing had come to mind.
“What do you like about figures?”
I had the impression I’d slipped another coin in the slot: The lottery balls began to turn around, as his cheeks became more flushed. He had obviously made an effort with his clothes for the interview. He clearly wasn’t used to wearing the gray suit and very sober striped tie he had on, and this was adding to his unease. His white socks contrasted so strikingly with the correctness of his outfit that they looked almost fluorescent.
“Well, I like it when it comes out right. I mean, when the columns balance, and I’m sure I’m going to land on my feet. It’s very satisfying, you know. As a matter of fact, I like it when things are straightforward. What’s more, when there’s an error, I can spend hours looking for it, until everything’s straightened out. Well ... not hours. I mean, I don’t waste time. I know how to get to the heart of something. But I mean I’m very precise.”
Poor young man. He was struggling to try and prove that he was the perfect candidate.
“Do you consider yourself to be an independent person?”
I had to concentrate on his face to stop my eyes from being drawn to his socks.
“Yes, I do. I’m very independent. No problem. I know how to sort things out by myself without troubling anyone.”
“Can you give me an example of when you’ve shown independence?”
 It was a technique well known to countless recruiters. When someone states they have a quality, they must be able to give examples of occasions when they’ve shown it. More precisely, they must be able to provide a context, a behavior, and an outcome. If one of the three is missing, then they are bound to be lying. It’s logical: If they’ve really got that quality, they must be able to give an example of a situation in which they applied it, specifically what they did, and the results.
“Hmm ... yes, of course.”
“What was the context?”
The lottery balls were spinning furiously as he tried to remember—or
imagine—such an event. The slight redness of his complexion intensified, and I thought I could make out a bead of sweat on his brow. I hated making the candidates uncomfortable, and it really wasn’t what I intended. But I had to evaluate whether they did or didn’t match the post on offer.
“Well, look, I regularly show independence, there’s no doubt about it. You can take my word for it.”
He uncrossed his legs, twisted a little in his chair, and then recrossed them. His socks really could have been in an ad for Tide.
“I’m just asking you to give me an example of the last time it happened. Where was it? What were the circumstances? What was the occasion? Take your time to remember. Relax, there’s no hurry.”
He began to fidget in his chair, wiping his hands, which were probably damp, on his trousers. Long seconds went by, seeming like hours, but still he could find nothing to say. I felt mounting embarrassment submerge him. He must hate me.
“Right,” I broke in, to put an end to his torture. “I’m going to tell you why I’m asking you this question. The vacancy is in a small company whose accountant has resigned. He had built up so many days off that he didn’t have to give notice. He left overnight. There is nobody in the company who can train his successor. If you take the job, you will have to manage on your own, going through his papers and his computer files. If you’re not really independent, there’s a risk it will turn into a nightmare for you, and it is my duty not to put you in such a situation. I’m not trying to trap you; I’m just trying to ascertain if you would be up to the task that needs to be done. From that point of view, your interest is the same as that of the company that’s offering the job.”

 He listened carefully and, in the end, recognized that he preferred working in an environment with a clear structure, where he knew precisely what was expected of him and he could find answers to his questions if he wasn’t sure. We spent the rest of the interview clarifying his career plan and defining the sort of position that would best suit his personality, his experience, and his skills. I promised to keep him on file and contact him again as soon as there was a vacancy that matched his profile better.
I walked him to the elevator and wished him the best of luck for the future.
Back in my office, I looked at the missed calls. I had a text from Dubreuil:
Come and meet me at the bar of the Hotel George V. Take a taxi and during the ride, contradict EVERYTHING the driver says. EVERYTHING. I’m waiting for you. —Y.D.
I reread it twice and couldn’t suppress a grimace at the thought of what awaited me. Everything would depend on what the taxi driver said. It could quickly become very unpleasant.
A glance at my watch: 5:40 P.M. I had no more interviews, but I never left the office before 7:00 at the best of times.
I looked at my e-mails. A dozen or so, but nothing urgent.
I grabbed my raincoat and looked into the corridor. Nobody in sight. I headed for the emergency stairs. No point in standing around waiting for the elevator. I reached the end of the corridor just as Grégoire Larcher charged out of his office. He must have seen my embarrassment instantly.
“Taking the afternoon off?” he asked with a mocking smile.
“I’ve got to go. An emergency.”
He walked off without answering, no doubt pleased to have caught me
red-handed. I rushed down the stairs, slightly disgusted at the way things were turning out. Dammit, I worked incredibly long hours every day, and the one day I left early, I got caught.
Irritated, I charged into the Avenue de l’Opéra. The fresh air helped me refocus—unless it was the prospect of the task I had to accomplish, which was even more worrying than running into Larcher. I walked to the taxi

 stand. Nobody. I had a little time to spare and felt almost relieved. I lit a cigarette and puffed on it nervously. As soon as I was stressed, I had to smoke. What a filthy habit! I’d never get rid of it.
As I walked, I had a strange feeling. The impression of being ... followed. I turned around but just saw lots of people. Difficult to be sure. I walked on, feeling uneasy.
I thought back to the last few times I had taken a cab. The drivers were for the most part out-and-out chatterboxes, openly expressing their opinions on all the topics in the news, and I had been careful not to give a different opinion. Okay, Dubreuil was right. But perhaps it was just a form of laziness. After all, there’s no point to trying to put people right. In any case, you won’t convince them.
I looked in the distance. A fair amount of traffic. It was rush hour. I might have to wait a long time for a taxi.
Suppose it was cowardice, more than laziness? Besides, not saying anything was not that restful either. I was often raging inside. So what was I afraid of then? Of not being liked? Of setting off a bad reaction in the other person? I didn’t know.
“Where you goin’?”
The cabby’s thick Parisian accent brought me out of my torpor. Caught up in my daydreams, I hadn’t seen him drive up. The driver was leaning out the window, staring at me impatiently. Fiftyish, thickset, bald, with a black moustache and a nasty look—why did I have to get a live one today of all days?
“Hey! You goin’ to make up your mind? I haven’t got all day!”
“The George the Fifth, please,” I stammered as I opened the rear door. Bad start. I had to get the upper hand. Come on, chin up—the opposite of
everything he says. Everything.
I leaned back in the seat and immediately the smell in the cab made me want to vomit: stale tobacco mixed with a supermarket car deodorant. Awful.
“I’ll give it to you straight,” the driver was saying. “The hotel might be close, but we’re not there yet! I tell you, I don’t know what people are up to today, but traffic’s at a stand-still.”
Hmm ... Difficult to say the opposite. How should I reply?

 “With a bit of luck, it’ll free up, and we’ll be there quicker than you think.”
“Ha, that’s right, still believe in Santa Claus, too?” he said. “I’ve been doing this job twenty-eight years. I know what I’m talking about. Goddammit, I’m sure half these people don’t even need their cars.”
He was talking loudly, as though I was in the back of a bus.
“Perhaps the cars really are useful. We don’t know,” I ventured.
“Yeah, that’s right! Most of them don’t go more than a few hundred yards
in their cars! They’re too lazy to walk and too cheap to take a taxi! There’s no one tighter than a Parisian!”
I had the feeling he wasn’t even noticing that I was disagreeing with him. It just fed the conversation. Perhaps, in the end, my task wouldn’t be as hard as I thought.
“I think Parisians are rather nice.”
“No joke? Well, you can’t know them very well. I’ve been studying them for twenty-eight years. And I can tell you, they’re getting worse each year. I can’t stand them anymore. I’ve had it up to here!”
His big, hairy hands tightened on the wheel, which was covered in artificial fur, and I could see the tension spreading to the muscles of his equally hairy forearms. Under the black hair was a huge tattoo that made me think of a giant frozen French fry. When I was little, American television used to show a cartoon ad with dancing French fries. In my whole life, I’d never seen such a ridiculous tattoo.
“I think you’re mistaken. People just send back a mirror of the way we talk to them.”
He slammed on the brakes and turned around to face me, his eyes wild with rage.
“What the hell do you think you’re saying?”
I wasn’t expecting such an intense reaction. I recoiled, which didn’t stop me from smelling his disgusting breath. Was that the smell of alcohol? I had to defuse the bomb, play at being the bomb squad a bit.
“I was just saying that perhaps people are uncommunicative, but if you take the time, accept the idea that they may have reasons for being stressed, talk to them gently”—I underlined this point—“they may open up and become more pleasant when they feel you’re interested in them.”

 He stared at me wordlessly, his eyes narrowing like a bad-tempered boar’s. Then he turned around and set off again. All of a sudden, dead silence in the cab. I took a few deep breaths, trying to release the tension in my body. As we inched forward in the traffic, the silence became oppressive. I had to break it.
“What’s your tattoo?” I said, with the vague hope of applying the idea I had just put forward.
“Oh, that,” he said, in an almost tender tone of voice that told me I had hit the mark. “That’s a childhood souvenir. It’s vengeance.”
I suppressed a smile. I was dying to ask him how a frozen French fry could symbolize vengeance, but I wasn’t that suicidal.
We were arriving at the Place de la Concorde.
“I’m not going down the Champs-Élysées. Too much traffic. I’m going along the river to the Pont de l’Alma, and then we can come back up Avenue George the Fifth from the bottom.”
“Hmm ... I’d prefer it if we went down the Champs Élysées, if you don’t mind.”
He didn’t say anything, sighed, and carried on with the conversation.
“I love tattoos. There aren’t two the same. And it takes guts to have a tattoo done. ’Cos it doesn’t come off. It’s for life. So it takes guts, it sure does. I love them on women, as well. There ain’t nothing sexier than a tattoo where you’re not expecting it—in hidden places, if you see what I mean.”
Suddenly, in the rearview mirror, I could see his eyes, full of lust. Calm down, Granddad, I thought. Calm down. I mustered all my courage and said, “I don’t like tattoos very much.”
“Yeah, nowadays youngsters don’t like them because they all want to be the same.”
“Perhaps they don’t need a tattoo to be different.”
“Different? Pfft! We didn’t give a damn. We just wanted to have some laughs. We got bikes or cars and took off. No traffic jams then!”
The man didn’t know how to talk at anything less than a bellow. And the smell ...
Okay, one more try. “Yes, but today, young people know you can’t carry on polluting the planet just to have fun.”

 “Ha! That’s right! More of that ecology bullshit! Global warming, load of bull. It comes from people who want to sell you intelligence, when they ain’t got any to sell.”
“What would you know?”
I said it without thinking. He braked violently, bringing the car to a standstill. I was thrown against the front seat and then bounced back. The driver exploded. “Fuck off, you hear? Fuck off! I’ve had enough of little jerks like you preaching at me! Get out!”
I opened the door and threw myself out, then ran off like a shot, before he thought of catching up with me.
I dodged between the cars until I reached the Champs-Élysées, running through a fine drizzle, which cooled my face. The fright passed, but I kept on running. I was running because nothing was holding me back. I had loosened my shackles, unlaced a few knots. For the first time, I had dared to say all I was thinking to a stranger, and I was beginning to feel lighter and, above all, free. The fine mist lashed my face as if to awaken me to life.

 8
THE UNIFORMED DOORMAN pushed the revolving door, I slipped in, and there I was, in the majestic entrance hall of the George V, one of the most beautiful luxury hotels in Paris. Pale marble covered the floor and columns. The reception desk was faced in darker marble, and behind it hung a large tapestry. The atmosphere was a mixture of great distinction and silent efficiency. Valets were busy moving gilt trolleys piled with trunks and suitcases, most of them covered in leather and bearing the stamp of a prestigious brand. Smiling receptionists handed over keys or street maps or information to guests who were probably used to a high level of service. A customer in shorts and Nike sneakers, a vision as unexpected as a rapper crossing the platform of a symphony orchestra, walked across the hall with the casualness of someone used to this sort of place—or a lot more chutzpah than I possessed, at any rate. Probably an American.
I went up to the concierge.
“Good evening, I’m looking for the bar, please.”
I was afraid he’d ask if I had a room there. I must have cut a sorry figure
with my wet hair, damp suit, and water trickling down my face. Fortunately, the vision of the tourist in shorts had made me feel a little more at ease.
“Yes, Monsieur. Turn right after the three steps, and you’ll see the bar a little farther on,” he replied, his tone pleasant but rather grand.
I climbed the three steps and found myself in a vast, glass-enclosed gallery running along one side of an interior courtyard filled with orange trees in magnificent carved pots. I walked through the gallery into the bar, an elegant wood-paneled room with red brocade chairs that invited intimate conversation. The George V bar is one of the most famous meeting places in Paris. Not many people were there when I arrived. A man and a woman of a certain age sat opposite each other at one of the marble-topped tables, and a little farther on, two men were involved in a quiet but obviously

 heated discussion. No trace of Dubreuil. I headed for a table at the back and sat facing the door, so I could see him arrive. Passing by the couple, I smelled the woman’s heady perfume. Shalimar, a classic.
Some newspapers had been left on my table—The International Herald Tribune, The New York Times, Le Monde—and some decidedly less serious magazines, including a well-thumbed copy of the gossip rag Closer. I was checking out the lives of the stars when I spotted Dubreuil coming toward me. I quickly got rid of the incriminating magazine. As he crossed the room, everyone turned to look at him. He was one of those charismatic men who can’t help but attract attention.
“So, tell me about your exploits!” he said, as he sat down in the chair across from me.
I noticed that he never said hello. Every time I saw him, it was as if he was resuming a conversation interrupted a few minutes earlier.
He ordered bourbon, and I settled for Perrier water.
I described the scene in the taxi in detail, and he was greatly amused by the driver’s behavior.
“You got a ripe one there! If I’d wanted to set up a meeting like that myself, I’d never have found one like him!”
I told him of the difficulty I had had expressing opinions that were in opposition to the driver’s, and the feeling of freedom in the end after I had succeeded.
“I’m really pleased you went through that. You know, you talked to me a lot about your life at work, about your feeling of being trapped at the office, of being under surveillance and constantly judged.”
“Yes. In that company, I’m prevented from being myself. I’m given very little freedom. I feel like a prisoner. I feel as if everything I say and do will be commented on. Even this evening, when I left a little early, I was on the receiving end of an unpleasant remark from my section head. It’s true it was earlier than usual, but I leave work very late every evening. It was especially unfair to criticize me on the only day I’ve left early! I’m suffocating in that place.”
He looked at me with a piercing eye, while savoring a mouthful of bourbon. I could smell its bouquet.
“Look, when I hear you say ‘They prevent me from being myself,’ I want to say that, on the contrary, they’re allowing you to be yourself. They’re

 even pushing you to be more and more yourself. That’s what’s suffocating you.”
I was perplexed.
“I don’t follow at all.”
He leaned back in his chair.
“You talked to me about some of your colleagues. I remember one of
them, in particular, who’s rather arrogant.”
“Thomas.”
“Yes, that’s it. A bit of a show-off, from what you said.”
“That’s a euphemism.”
“Imagine that Thomas had been in your place tonight, that he had left his
office at four or five o’clock and had met his boss in the corridor.”
“It wasn’t our immediate boss. It was Larcher, the section head.”
“Fine. Imagine the scene: Thomas leaves exceptionally early and meets
his section head in the corridor.” “Okay.”
“You’re a little mouse, and you watch them as they meet.”
“Right.”
“What do they say to each other?”
“Hmm ... I don’t know. Well, that’s funny, I imagine Larcher smiling at
Thomas, a friendly smile, almost an indulgent smile.”
“Interesting. You think that’s how your section head would have reacted
if he had met Thomas tonight instead of you?”
“Well ... yes, it’s likely. I imagine him like that, at any rate. It would be
very unfair, I think, but there’s a certain favoritism around there. The rules are not the same for everyone.”
“Right. What’s the name of your other colleague, the one who seems to be making fun of everyone?”
“Mickaël?”
“Yes, that’s the one. Now visualize the same scene, but this time between Larcher and Mickaël. It’s Mickaël who’s leaving at five o’clock. What happens?”
“Let’s see. I imagine Larcher makes the same remark to him as he did to me!”
“Yes?”

 “He says, ‘So, taking the afternoon off?’ perhaps even more sarcastically than he said it to me. Yes, that’s right! Larcher is really baiting him.”
“And how does Mickaël react?”
“It’s hard to imagine, but I think Mickaël’s got the nerve to rib him back and say, ‘You should know!’ or something like that.”
“Right! And how does Larcher take that?”
“They both laugh as they carry on walking.”
“Interesting,” Dubreuil said, draining his glass. “And what do you think
about that?”
“I don’t know,” I replied. “If it really happened like that, it would indeed
be the sign of favoritism.”
“No, Alan. That’s not it.”
He signaled to the waiter, who was beside us in a flash.
“Another bourbon.”
I took a sip of Perrier. Dubreuil leaned toward me, his blue eyes looking
into mine. I felt naked.
“That’s not it, Alan,” he went on. “It’s a lot more complicated than that.
Thomas is full of himself, and his attitude induces in Larcher a certain respect. Mickaël teases everyone, and Larcher knows he’s a smart aleck who thinks he’s smarter than the rest. So Larcher teases him to let him know that he’s even smarter than Mikaël. You ...”
He paused.
“I don’t play games like the others,” I interjected. “I’m natural, and so he takes advantage.”
“No, it’s trickier than that. Alan, what characterizes you is precisely that you’re not free. You’re not free, so he locks you up even more in the prison you’re in.”
A thick silence, as I digested the blow. Then I saw red, and I could feel the anger rising in me. What the hell was he going on about?
“No he doesn’t. It’s quite the opposite! Absolutely the opposite! I can’t bear anyone infringing my freedom!”
“Look at what happened with the taxi driver. You said you had to force yourself to express opinions contrary to his. Yet people like him are strangers you will never see again. Your life, your future doesn’t depend on them, agreed? And yet, you feel the need to say what will make them like you. You are afraid of disappointing people and being rejected. That’s why

 you don’t allow yourself to really express what you feel or behave according to your wishes. You make every effort to adapt yourself to others. And that’s on your own initiative, Alan. Nobody’s asking you to do it.”
“But that seems quite natural to me! Besides, if everyone made efforts for others, everyone’s lives would be improved.”
“Yes, except that in your case, it’s not a choice. You don’t say, in a detached way, ‘Okay, today I’m going to do what people expect of me.’ No. Unconsciously you force yourself to do it. You think that otherwise you won’t be liked, you won’t be wanted. So, without even realizing it, you impose lots of restrictions on yourself. Your life becomes very restricted, and as a result, you don’t feel free. And you hold it against other people.”
I was bewildered. A real smack on the head. I was expecting anything but this. Ideas, emotions, everything was rushing around in my head. I felt dizzy. I would have liked to violently reject Dubreuil’s analysis, but part of me felt it contained some truth. A disturbing truth. Having spent my life feeling pain at the slightest attack on my freedom, at being dominated by other people, I was now being told I was the architect of my own suffering.
“And do you see, Alan, that when you force yourself not to disappoint others, in order to fulfill their expectations of you or to respect their way of doing things, then, believe it or not, it encourages certain people to become very demanding of you, as if they feel it is your duty to submit to their desires. It seems quite natural to them. If you feel guilty about leaving the office early, your boss will make you feel even guiltier. And no doubt it’s unconscious. He senses that to you, it’s not acceptable to leave early, so he decides it isn’t. You induce his reaction. Do you understand?”
I said nothing. I remained silent, absorbed by the subtle movement of his hand that for some time had been making circles in the air with his glass, the ice cubes swirling in the bourbon, knocking on the walls of their crystal prison.
“Alan,” he went on, “freedom is inside us. It must come from us. Don’t expect it to come from the exterior.”
His words resonated in my mind.
“It’s possible,” I finally admitted.
“You know, there are stacks of studies that have been carried out on
survivors of the concentration camps in the Second World War. One of the studies shows that what nearly all of them had in common was the desire to

 remain free in their heads. For example, if they only had a little piece of bread to eat for the day, they said to themselves, ‘I am free to eat this bread when I want. I am free to choose the moment to swallow it.’ With the help of choices that can seem as pathetic as that, they kept a feeling of freedom inside themselves. And it would appear this feeling of freedom helped them stay alive.”
I listened to him carefully and couldn’t help telling myself that had I been in that situation, I would have so violently resented the domination and the abuse of power by my jailers that I would never have been capable of developing such a frame of mind.
“How can I become ... freer in myself?”
“There is no ready-made recipe, no single way of getting there. One good way, however, is to choose to do for a certain time what you would usually carefully avoid.”
“I feel as if everything you’ve advised me to do since the beginning consists of doing what I don’t like doing. Is that how you move on in life?”
He burst out laughing. The old lady with the heady perfume turned around to look.
“It’s more complex than that. But when in life we arrange things in order to keep whatever frightens us at arm’s length, we prevent ourselves from discovering that most of our fears are inventions of our mind. The only way to know whether what we believe is false or not is to go out and verify it in the field! So it’s sometimes useful to take ourselves by the hand, even if it means doing violence to ourselves, in order to experiment with what is worrying us and give ourselves a chance to realize that we’ve perhaps been making a mistake.”
“So, what are you going to ask of me this time to solve my problem?”
“Right. Let’s see,” he said, settling into his armchair, visibly pleased to be in a position to pronounce his sentence. “Since you believe—mistakenly —that people won’t like you if you don’t behave according to their criteria, since you feel the need to correspond to the image they expect of you, you’re going to practice disorienting yourself.”
I swallowed hard.
“Disorienting myself?”
“Yes, you’re going to train yourself to do the opposite of what you feel
you absolutely must do. For example, you’re going to start by taking to the

 office every day that magazine that interests you so much, until we’re sure everyone has seen you with it.”
To my dismay, he grabbed the Closer that I had turned facedown when he came in.
“If I do that, I’m done for.”
“Ah! Your image, your image! See how you’re not free?”
“But it would have consequences for my credibility at work. I can’t do
that!”
“You forget that you’ve told me over and over that in your company,
people don’t matter, all that matters are their results. So they won’t give a damn about what you’re reading.”
“But I can’t. I’d be ashamed!”
“There’s no reason to be ashamed of things that interest you.”
“It doesn’t interest me. I never read this magazine!”
“Yes, I know, nobody reads it. And yet it sells hundreds of thousands of
copies every week. But it interests you, since you had it in your hands when I arrived!”
“It was just out of curiosity.”
“Precisely. You’re allowed to be curious. It’s a positive quality, and you don’t have to be ashamed.”
I could already imagine the faces of my colleagues and my managers when they saw me with it.
“Alan, you will be free the day you can’t even be bothered to wonder what the people who see you with a copy of Closer under your arm are thinking.”
That day was a long, long way away, I couldn’t help thinking.
“It won’t be easy,” I protested.
“Each day, you’re to commit, let’s say, three mistakes—mistakes over
common things. Specifically, I want you to behave in an inappropriate manner three times a day. It can be about anything, even small things. What I want is for you to become imperfect for a while, until you realize that you’re still alive, that it doesn’t change anything, and that your relationships with others haven’t gotten worse. Finally, you’re going to refuse at least twice a day to do what others ask of you, or else contradict their point of view. It’s up to you.”

 I looked at him in silence. My lack of enthusiasm didn’t affect his. He seemed delighted by his ideas.
“When do I start?”
“Right away! You must never put off till later things that can make you grow!”
“Fine. So, in that case, I think I’ll leave without saying good-bye and without even offering to pay my share of the bill.”
“Perfect! That’s a good start!”
He was visibly pleased, but the mischievous look in his eye didn’t bode well.
I got up and left the table.
I had gotten all the way across the bar and was at the door to the gallery when he called out to me. His loud voice broke the muffled silence of the place, and everyone turned around to see what he was waving at arm’s length.
“Alan! Come back! You’ve forgotten your magazine!”

 9
I HATE MONDAY mornings. That must be the most trite and widespread feeling in the world. But I had a special reason to feel that way: It was the day of our weekly business meeting. Every Monday, my colleagues and I were told that the targets hadn’t been met and were asked what we were going to do about it. What decisions were we taking? What actions were we going to implement?
My weekend had been rich in emotions, as had the week following my meeting with Dubreuil. The first few days, I had forced myself to come up with the assigned number of inappropriate behaviors and refusals to do what others asked. After that, however, I had bravely grasped all the opportunities that came up.
Thus it was that I had driven two miles an hour down a narrow street with cars behind me, devoured by the desire to pull over and let them pass or speed up in order not to look like an old man. I had made noise in my apartment and been called to task twice by Madame Blanchard. I had hung up on a telemarketer trying to sell me windows. I had gone to the office wearing two different colored socks. I had taken my coffee break each day at the café across the street during the peak period when everyone at the bar is complaining about the country’s economic problems and proffering obvious solutions—why didn’t the government do something about it? And I, of course, had disagreed with everyone about nearly everything. Behaving like this had been very trying, even if a part of me was beginning to feel a certain pleasure at overcoming my fears.
As soon as my first interview with a candidate had finished that Monday, I ran to the accursed staff meeting. It was 11:05 A.M., so I was late. I went into the room with a notepad in my hand and Closer under my arm. All the consultants were already sitting at the tables, which were arranged in a circle. They were all waiting for me.

 Luc Fausteri threw me an icy look. On his left, Grégoire Larcher maintained his unchanging toothpaste smile. I sat down in the empty seat. Faces turned toward me. I placed the magazine on the table, face up with the title showing, and then avoided meeting anyone’s eyes. I was too ashamed.
On my left, Thomas was pretending to read the Financial Times. Mickaël was joking with the woman next to him, who was trying to scan La Tribune while chuckling from time to time at Mickaël’s idiotic remarks.
“The week’s figures are ...” Larcher liked to speak, then leave the end of the sentence suspended in the air, assuring himself of our complete attention. He got up, as if to ensure his domination over those present, and went on, still smiling: “The week’s figures are encouraging. We’re up four percent on the number of recruitment assignments compared to the previous week, and up seven percent over the same week last year. With regard to this indicator, I remind you that our objective is to be up eleven percent. Of course, individual results are uneven, and I must again congratulate Thomas who remains at the top of the group.”
Thomas adopted a relaxed and absentmindedly satisfied look. He loved appearing to be the victor who’s too cool to care. In fact, I knew that compliments had the effect of cocaine on him.
“But I have an excellent piece of news for the others,” Larcher informed us, and then paused. As his seductive gaze swept over the group, he allowed the silence to make what he was about to reveal seem more dramatic.
“First of all, I must say Luc Fausteri has worked hard for you. For nearly a month, he has been analyzing all our data to understand in a rational way why some of you have better results than the others, despite all of us using the same working methods. He has cross-checked in every direction, done the stats, studied the graphs. And the results are pure genius. We’ve got the solution, and each of you will be able to profit from it on a daily basis. However, I’ll leave it to you, Luc, to present your conclusions yourself!”
Our section head, more serious than ever, began speaking in his usual monotone. “Going through all your time sheets, I saw an inverse correlation between the average length of interviews per consultant over the past twelve months and the average monthly sales of that consultant, corrected for any vacation he took.”

 The room remained silent for a few moments, everyone looking questioningly at Fausteri.
“Can you translate that into French?” said Mickaël, bursting into laughter.
“It’s very simple!” said Larcher, immediately taking over. “It’s the ones who spend the most time on their recruitment interviews who get the fewest recruitment contracts from businesses. It’s quite logical, if you think about it. You can’t be in two places at once. If you spend too much time interviewing candidates, you have less time to canvass companies and sell our services, and so your results won’t be as good. Irrefutable.”
The team remained silent as the information sank in.
“For example,” Larcher went on, “Thomas, the best of you, spends on average one hour and twelve minutes on an interview, while you, Alan, at the bottom of the group—sorry, Alan—spend on average one hour and fifty-seven minutes. That’s almost twice as much!”
I sunk into my chair, while continuing to look at the table in front of me with what I hoped was a relaxed air. But there was nothing on the table but my Closer. I felt the weight of their eyes.
“No doubt we can reduce the length of our interviews,” said Alice, a young consultant. “But we’re going to bring down the success rate for our recruits. I always think of the guarantee we give businesses. If the recruit isn’t suitable or resigns within six months of being taken on, we must provide a replacement candidate. Excuse me, Thomas,” she said, turning toward her colleague, “but I recall that it’s your clients who have made the greatest call on that guarantee. For me, it happens very rarely.”
“I don’t want to leap to Thomas’s defense; he has no need of it,” said Larcher. “But the cost of renewing his defective candidates is tiny compared to the gain in turnover he contributes.”
“But that’s not in our clients’ interests!” said Alice angrily. “And therefore, in the long term, it’s not in ours either. It damages our image.”
“Clients don’t hold it against us, I can assure you,” Larcher countered. “They know we can’t control human nature. Ours is an inexact science. Nobody can be sure of choosing the right candidate all the time.”
We were careful not to reply, as Larcher’s smiling face swept the room.
After a moment, David, the longest-serving member of the team, dared to remark, “What’s not so obvious is that our interview process is long, and we

 can’t help it if our candidates don’t always get to the point in the shortest possible time. We can scarcely cut them off, can we?”
“That’s where I’ve got good news for you,” said Larcher, triumphantly. “Luc, tell us your second conclusion.”
Luc Fausteri spoke without looking at us, his eyes fixed on his papers. “I’ve said that the average length of Thomas’s interviews is noticeably less than that of the less commercially successful consultants. Analyzed more precisely, the figures reveal something else: The duration of the face-to-face interview is especially short for the candidates who don’t go through to the final phase.”
“In other words,” Larcher interrupted, “if you spend less time with the dead losses, you’ll have more time to spend canvassing. Shorten the interviews as soon as you realize that the person doesn’t fit the vacancy. There’s no point in going on.”
An embarrassed silence around the table.
“In any case, you won’t be giving them the job, so there’s no need to have scruples,” Larcher said.
Embarrassment gave way to general unease.
“I don’t quite agree.”
All eyes turned toward me. I didn’t often speak in meetings, and never to
express my disapproval. I decided on a soft approach. “I think what you suggest is not in the interest of our firm. A candidate who doesn’t suit a post that’s to be filled today will perhaps fit one we have tomorrow. We have everything to gain, in the long run, from developing a pool of candidates who value our interviews and have confidence in us.”
Larcher moved to regain the upper hand. “As far as that’s concerned, no need to worry, my friends. I can reassure you that in this climate—and it’s not about to change—there are far more candidates than vacancies to be filled, and we don’t need to run after them. Rattle a dustbin and ten fall out. You only have to bend down and pick them up.”
A wave of sniggering went around the room.
Summoning all my courage, I said, “As far as I’m concerned, I’m attached to certain ethics. We’re not a company that recruits for its own benefit. Our job is to fill others’ needs. Therefore, our mission goes beyond the simple selection of a candidate, and I think it’s our role to advise those

 who don’t fit the profile of the moment. It’s our social responsibility, you might say. In any event, it’s what makes my job one I like.”
Larcher listened, still smiling, but as happened every time his interests were threatened, his expression changed imperceptibly; his smile became a little carnivorous.
“I think, my friends, that Alan has forgotten he works for Dunker Consulting and not for Mother Teresa.”
He started to laugh, quickly joined by Thomas, then Mickaël. “If you’re in any doubt,” he went on, “look at the little box at the bottom of your pay slip, and you’ll realize that a charity wouldn’t pay you like that.”
A few people chuckled.
Larcher’s eyes narrowed as he zeroed in on me. “Now, Alan, you’re going to have to keep your nose to the grindstone to earn that salary. And it’s not by playing at being a social worker that you’re going to do it.”
“I earn the firm money,” I countered. “My salary is highly cost-effective, and therefore it’s deserved.”
Deathly silence in the room. All my colleagues were looking at their feet. The atmosphere was oppressive. Larcher was obviously very surprised by my reaction; that’s probably what disconcerted him the most.
“It’s not for you to judge,” he said finally, in an aggressive tone, no doubt convinced that it was vital to maintain his authority by having the last word. “It’s for us to fix your targets, not you. And so far, you haven’t met them.”
The meeting finished quickly. It was clear that Larcher was very annoyed by the direction it had taken, which had lessened the impact of his message. The one time I’d had the courage to disagree, I might have been better advised to keep quiet. And yet, I was happy to have expressed my convictions and not let my values be trampled on.
I left the meeting room and went back to my office, preferring not to see Larcher. I didn’t want to see anyone, in fact. I waited for everyone to go to lunch before leaving myself. I opened my door a crack. Silence. I walked down the corridor. Just as I passed Thomas’s office, his phone rang. The switchboard was closed. Someone must be calling his direct line.
I don’t know what came over me. It was neither my habit nor office procedure to answer someone else’s phone, but the ringing was so insistent that I decided to go ahead. I opened the door to his office. Everything was tidy. His files were in a neat pile, and his Mont Blanc pen was placed just

 so. A very slight perfume floated in the air. Perhaps his aftershave ... I picked up the phone, a much more elegant model than we had in the rest of the department.
“Al ...” I was going to say my name to let the caller know I was not Thomas, but he didn’t give me time, cutting me off and talking at top speed with a voice full of hatred. “What you’ve done is shitty. I clearly told you I hadn’t resigned yet and was counting on your total discretion. I know you called my boss to tell him his head of administration was going to resign and that you were offering to find his replacement.”
“Please, I’m not ...”
“Shut up! I know it’s you because I haven’t sent my resumé anywhere else. You hear? Nowhere! It can only be you. It’s disgusting.”

 10
I WAS COMING out of the building when Alice suddenly appeared. She had obviously been waiting for me since the end of the meeting.
“Are you going to lunch?” she asked.
She was smiling, but I detected some uneasiness. Was she afraid to be seen with me?
“Yes,” I told her.
She waited a second, as if she wished the idea would come from me, and then said, “Shall we have lunch together?”
“Yes, let’s.”
“I know a really nice restaurant that’s a bit out of the way. That way, we can talk freely.”
“What’s it called?”
“Le Repaire d’Arthus.”
“Never heard of it.”
“It’s rather ... original. I won’t say any more about it. I’ll let you discover
it for yourself.”
“As long as they don’t eat strange animals, it’ll be fine.”
“You Americans! You’re so squeamish.”
We walked down the Rue Molière and at the end ducked into a vaulted
passageway connecting with the arcade that runs along the interior garden of the Palais Royal. What a haven of peace the garden is, in the midst of this busy district in the heart of Paris! Rows of chestnut trees, paths of packed earth, and the massive old building itself, loaded with history. Under the arches, we could smell the faint musty odor of centuries-old stone, as the click of our heels resounded on the worn flagstones.
At the north end of the garden, we climbed a staircase with a pretty wrought-iron handrail. We passed a shop selling old music boxes then turned into the Rue Croix des Petits Champs. The sidewalk of this busy old

 Parisian street is so narrow we had to walk single file. Each of the little shops we passed seemed unique, light-years from the big chain stores that sell the same things in every city of the world. An umbrella seller stood next to a pork butcher’s, next to a hat seller, followed by a tea merchant, then a specialist in craft jewelry. Food shops, shoe repairers, an antiquarian bookshop—I wanted to stop and look at them all.
“Do you know the Galerie Vivienne?” Alice asked.
“Not at all,” I told her.
We crossed the street and went under an archway squeezed between two
shops, emerging in one of Paris’s famous covered passages. A beautiful relic of past centuries with a vaulted ceiling of glass and wrought iron, the gallery had been restored to its former glory. Upscale boutiques and restaurants lined the passageway. Our footsteps echoed like castanets as we walked along the mosaic floor. Away from the crowds and hustle bustle of the city, the gallery is an oasis of almost religious calm. Bathed in soft light, it has a melancholic serenity.
“The gallery dates from early in the 19th century,” Alice explained. “It was a fashionable gathering place during the Restoration. I come here when I need to take a break and forget the office for a bit.”
Back on the street, we noticed the smell of warm bread coming from a nearby bakery. It made me very hungry all of a sudden.
“Here we are!” said Alice, moments later, pointing to a restaurant with a deep gray painted facade.
We entered a small room with just 20 tables. The décor was baroque, and the walls were hung with pictures made up of quotations in carved wood frames. The owner—short, fair-haired, 40-ish, with a silk scarf knotted at the neck of his pink shirt—was in the midst of a conversation with two customers. He broke off as soon as he saw Alice.
“Here’s my recruiting sergeant!” he said in a mannered voice that if it hadn’t been accompanied by a knowing smile, would have seemed obsequious.
“I’ve already told you not to call me that, Arthus,” Alice said with a laugh.
He kissed her hand.
“And who is the handsome prince accompanying you today?” he asked, eyeing me intensely from head to toe. “Madame has good taste ... and she’s

 taking risks, bringing him to Arthus.”
“Alan is a colleague,” Alice told him.
“Oh! You’re one as well! Don’t try and seduce me. I warn you: I’m quite
unemployable in a company.”
“I only recruit accountants,” I replied.
“Oh,” he said, simulating great sadness. “He’s only interested in number-
crunchers.”
“Have you got a table for us, by any chance, Arthus? I haven’t booked.” “My astrologer told me that an important person would come today, so
I’ve kept this table. It’s for you.”
“You’re too kind.”
He handed us the menus with great elegance. Alice put hers down
without a glance.
“You’re not looking at it?” I asked.
“No point.”
I shot her an inquiring look, but she merely gave me an enigmatic little
smile.
The menu was fairly extensive, and everything looked appetizing. Not
easy to choose from such a fine variety of dishes. I hadn’t even finished reading when our host came to take our order.
“Madame Alice.”
“I’ll leave it to you, Arthus.”
“Oh, I like it when women submit to me! Henceforth, you’re mine. Has
my handsome prince made up his mind?” he said, leaning toward me slightly.
“I’ll have a mille-feuille, a napoleon with tomatoes with basil, and ...” “No, no, no,” he muttered.
“Sorry?”
“No, no, that’s not a starter for a prince. Let me choose. Let’s see. I’m
going to make you chicory with Roquefort.”
I was a little put out by his attitude.
“What’s Roquefort?”
Arthus’s jaw dropped in mock surprise.
“What? My prince is joking, isn’t he?”
“My colleague is American,” explained Alice. “He’s only been living in
France for a few months.”

 “But he has no accent,” Arthus said. “And he’s cute and not too big for a Yank. You weren’t brought up on cornflakes and Big Macs?”
“His mother was French, but he’s always lived in the States.”
“Right. We’ll have to educate him. I’m counting on you, Alice. I’ll look after him from the culinary point of view. So let’s start with Roquefort. You know that France has more than five hundred cheeses?”
“We’ve got a number in the States, you know.”
“No, you haven’t,” he said vigorously, with mock exasperation. “We’re not talking about the same thing! Not at all. What you have isn’t cheese, it’s plastic wrapped in cellophane. It’s gelatinous gum flavored with salt.
“We’re going to have to teach him everything!” Arthus continued. “Right. Let’s start with Roquefort. Roquefort is the king of cheeses, and the king of cheeses—”
I interrupted him. “Okay, let’s go with the chicory and Roquefort. Then, I’ll carry on with—”
“We don’t carry on, here, my prince. It’s not a pantomime.”
“Right. I’ll follow it up with—”
“No, we don’t follow anything up here, either. We’re not policemen on a
case.”
I started again, choosing my words carefully: “Then I will have boeuf
bourguignon with boiled potatoes.”
“Oh no,” he said very firmly. “That’s not you at all. You can’t go
slumming with a boeuf bourguignon. No, I’ll bring you, let’s see, turkey forestière cooked in yellow wine from the Jura region, with oyster mushrooms from Sologne.”
I was a little lost. “Am I allowed to choose my dessert?”
“You have every right, my prince.”
“Then I’ll have the tarte Tatin.”
“Fine! So that’s”—he was concentrating on what he was writing down
—“a chocolate mousse. Thank you and bon appétit! Arthus is delighted to be able to serve you.”
He disappeared into the kitchen.
I burst out laughing. “What’s all that nonsense?”
“The menu is a load of bull. In fact, there is only one menu, the same for
everyone. But it’s very good. All the produce is fresh. Léon cooks all the

 dishes,” she said, pointing to a tall man I could see through the round glass window in the door to the kitchen.
“I’m dying of hunger.”
“The service is fast. It’s the advantage of having only one menu. Their customers are all regulars. Except, once, there was a German tourist. He reacted very badly to Arthus’s little game. He kicked up a fuss and left in an uproar.”
Arthus came back out almost right away, twirling the two appetizers in the air.
“And here’s your chicory with Roquefort!”
I was preparing to throw myself on my starter when I looked down and saw something disgusting. “Alice,” I murmured, “my cheese is rotten. It’s moldy. It’s disgusting!”
She looked at me for a couple of seconds in silence and then burst out laughing.
“That’s how it’s supposed to be!”
“My cheese is supposed to be moldy?”
“That’s how it’s eaten, it’s ...”
“You expect me to eat rotten cheese?”
It felt like another task imposed by Dubreuil.
“It’s not rotten, it’s just moldy and ...”
“Rotten, moldy, it’s all the same.”
“No! This is healthy mold,” she insisted. “I swear you can eat it without
risk. Besides, without the mold, the cheese would be of no interest.” “You’re making fun of me.”
“No, I assure you! Watch.”
She skewered several pieces of cheese with her fork and popped them in
her mouth, chewed, and swallowed with a smile. “It’s foul!” I protested.
“Try it, at least!”
“Certainly not!”
I made do with the chicory leaves, carefully choosing the few that hadn’t been in contact with the cheese.
Arthus looked distraught when he came to remove our plates.
“I’m going to have to hide this from Léon. He’d shed tears if he saw you hadn’t honored his appetizer. I know him; he’d be inconsolable.”

 He disappeared into the kitchen with our plates. Alice rested her forearms on the table and leaned toward me.
“You know, you really surprised me at the meeting. I never would have imagined that you’d stand up to Larcher. You were taking a risk.”
“I don’t know about that. At any rate, I was sincere. I’m convinced it’s not in the firm’s interests to neglect candidates who don’t immediately fit a vacancy.”
She looked straight at me for a few moments. I had never noticed before how pretty she was. Her light chestnut hair was tied back, revealing a slender, very feminine neck. Her blue eyes were both gentle and assertive, shining with intelligence. There was something very graceful about her.
“I’m more and more convinced,” I went on, “that Larcher, Dunker, and the other members of the management team are deliberately making decisions that aren’t in the interests of the firm.”
“Why would they do that?” she asked.
“The decisions are dictated above all by the financial markets. By the stock exchange, in fact.”
“You mean by our shareholders,” Alice said.
“So to speak.”
“I don’t see what difference that makes. It’s in the shareholders’ interest,
too, for the company to prosper.”
“No, it depends ...” I hesitated.
“Depends on what?”
“On their motives for being shareholders. You know, we have all sorts of
shareholders: small investors, banks, investment funds. Do you think that the majority of them are interested in the healthy, harmonious development of our company? There’s only one thing that counts, or rather there are two: that the share price keeps going up and that we cough up dividends every year.”
“That’s not so shocking,” Alice said. “The principle of capitalism is that those who take a financial risk by investing in a company are the ones who earn the most if it succeeds. It’s the remuneration for their risk-taking, thanks to which the company is able to develop. The value of the shares goes up, you know, if the company develops successfully, because then the risk seems weaker and the number of people wanting to invest increases. As

 for the dividend, it’s just the distribution of profits to the shareholders. For there to be dividends, the company has to be in good health.”
“Yes, in theory,” I agreed. “But in practice the system is completely distorted. Now the shareholders who are really concerned about investing in the long-term development of the company are few and far between. Most of the shareholders either want to make a killing fast by selling their shares as soon as the value has gone up enough, or they hold enough shares to influence the company’s decisions. And believe me, even the large shareholders aren’t really interested in the company’s development but only in making sure it can pay fat dividends, even if that jeopardizes future growth.”
“And you think that’s the ga me Dunker and his henchmen are playing— serving the shareholders’ interests at the expense of the company’s?”
“Yes.”
“Even so,” Alice argued, “it’s Dunker’s firm; he was the founder. I find it hard to imagine he’d favor a course of action that would slowly destroy it.”
“It’s not really his firm anymore. Since he took it public, he only holds eight percent of the shares. It’s as if he had sold it.”
Alice pulled a face. “Yes, but he’s remained at the head of the company. So he must love it all the same.”
“He’s not a sentimental person,” I reminded her. “No, I think his staying at the helm is part of an agreement between him and the two major shareholders, who bought stock at the initial public offering.”
Arthus set down our turkey and left us to greet another regular customer. “Countess, at your service!” we heard him say.
Alice shook her head. “Poor Arthus. However far back my family tree
may go, there are only peasants, yokels, servants. And, you know, the nobility was abolished in 1790.”
“Yes, but Arthus seems to have reestablished it!”
The turkey in yellow wine was delicious. This type of dish was enough to keep even the most cornflakes- and Big-Mac-fed American on French soil.
“Did you know Tonero?” asked Alice between two mouthfuls.
“The man who resigned shortly after my arrival?”
“Yes. He was the best consultant. A very clever guy. And a salesman
without equal. He knew his worth and tried to negotiate a raise.” “They refused, if my memory serves me right.”

 “Yes, but he didn’t back down. He prepared a dossier to prove that if they refused, his resignation would cost them more than his raise. He calculated the cost of recruiting and training his replacement, how long the replacement would be paid before he was really operational, and so on. In fact, it was a no-brainer. It would cost them less to give Tonero a raise than to let him go. And yet, that’s what they did. Do you know why?”
“A question of pride? Not to back down on their decision?”
“Not even,” Alice said. “They coldly explained that, if they started to let wage costs go up, it would show up right away in the projected budget, and the share price would be affected. On the other hand, most of the cost of recruiting his successor would appear under Fees and Training, and the stock exchange is far less sensitive to those cost centers.”
“That’s ridiculous.”
“In the Training division, it’s not much better. Before, the courses used to finish at 6 P.M. Now they’re over by 5.”
“Why?” I asked her.
“You want the reason given to the client or the one dictated by business?” “Go on ...”
“On a pedagogical level, it’s fundamental, ‘Mister Client, sir. Our
research shows that a slight reduction in hours improves the training by optimizing its absorption by the course participant.’”
“And the reality?”
“The trainer has to be on the phone by 5:05 P.M., canvassing new clients. Understand, by 6 P.M. nobody is available anymore.”
I took a sip of wine. “Talking about unfair practices, quite by chance I discovered that one of our colleagues ratted on a candidate, telling his company he was leaving before he had resigned.”
“Oh, haven’t you been informed?”
“What do you mean?”
“It was the day you were absent. Dunker came along to the weekly
business meeting. He hinted that there was good business to be done that way.”
“You’re joking.”
“Not at all.”
“Mark Dunker, our CEO, is inviting his consultants to indulge in that sort
of practice? It’s revolting!”

 “He didn’t explicitly tell us to do it. But he made it understood.”
I looked at the gray sky through the window. The rain was beginning to fall.
“You know, even if it does us good to get it off our chest,” I said, “it still depresses me. I need to believe in what I’m doing. To get out of bed in the morning, I have to feel that my work serves a purpose, even if it’s not directly connected to some noble cause. At the very least, I want to be able to feel the satisfaction of a job well done. But if we’re supposed to do any old thing, at top speed, just to enrich shareholders, who aren’t even interested in the company, then it doesn’t make sense anymore. I need my work to have meaning.”
“You’re an idealist, Alan.”
“Yes, probably.”
“That’s all well and good, but you’re living in the wrong times. We’re
surrounded by cynics, and you have to be a cynic yourself to survive.”
“I ... I don’t agree. Or rather, I refuse to give in to that view. Otherwise, there’s no point to anything. I can’t accept the idea that my life amounts to working just to buy food, put a roof over my head, and go out every now
and then. It would be absolutely meaningless.”
“How are my little turkeys?” asked Arthus, looking at our plates,
confident of the success of his dish.
“Don’t be so familiar,” Alice told him, pretending to be offended.
He walked away laughing.
“I need a job,” I continued, “that brings something to others, even if it
doesn’t change the face of the universe. I want to go to bed at night telling myself that my day has been useful, that I’ve made a contribution.”
“You’ll have to face facts, Alan. You can’t change the world.”
I put my fork down. Even my turkey with yellow wine didn’t tempt me anymore.
I saw Arthus kissing a woman’s hand. He lived in a world he had created himself.
“Yes, we can change the world,” I said emphatically. “I’m convinced each one of us can. As long as we don’t throw in the towel, don’t give up on what we think is right, don’t allow our values to be trampled on. Otherwise, we’re party to what happens.”

 “Fine words,” agreed Alice. “But in practice, they’re not much use. It’s not because you decide to maintain your integrity that you’ll stop others from behaving badly.”
I looked at Alice. It’s strange; I had the feeling that even if she was trying to prove that my efforts were futile, deep down, she wanted me to be right. Perhaps she no longer had hope, but all she wanted was to hope again.
I started to daydream, letting my eyes wander over the restaurant walls. They came to rest on one of the maxims that Arthus had put up. It was a quotation attributed to Gandhi: “We must be the change we want to see in the world.”

 11
“WHAT’S CERTAIN IS that change won’t come from others!”
Yves Dubreuil leaned back in his armchair and put his feet up on his desk.
I like the smell of leather and old books, smells I associated with this place where, for a whole day, I had confided in him when we first met. The soft evening light filtering through the trees of his garden accentuated the English atmosphere of the room. Dubreuil was swirling the ice cubes around in his bourbon, as was his habit.
“It’s my conviction,” he went on, “that all change must come from inside oneself, not from outside. Neither an organization nor a government nor a new boss nor a trade union nor a new partner will change your life. Besides, look at politics: Every time people have counted on someone to change their life, did it work? Think of Mitterrand in 1981, Chirac in 1995, Obama in 2008. Every time, people were disappointed. Afterward, they thought they’d been mistaken about the man, that they’d made a bad choice. In fact, that’s not the problem. The reality is that nobody but you will change your life. That’s why you’ve got to take control yourself.
“Mind you,” he continued, “I think Gandhi’s thought went beyond individual considerations, personal expectations of change. I think he was referring to the changes that everyone would like to see in society generally, and he probably meant that it is much more powerful to embody the path oneself and be a model for others than simply to denounce and criticize.”
“Yes, I understand,” I said. “The idea is interesting, but my becoming a model of equilibrium won’t change anything at all with regard to what my company demands of me, nor will it make my boss start to respect me.”
“Yes it will, in a way,” Dubreuil countered. “If the fact that your boss doesn’t respect you makes you suffer, then don’t wait for him to change of his own accord. You’ve got to learn how to make him respect you. See what

 you can change about yourself that will make you more respected: your relative positioning, perhaps; the way you talk; the way you communicate your results. Perhaps by not letting inappropriate remarks go unchallenged. Managers who go in for moral bullying don’t attack all their employees, and their choice of victim isn’t random.”
“You’re not going to say it’s the victim’s fault if they’re bullied!”
“No, I’m not saying that. It’s not their fault, of course, and you can’t even say they bring it on without realizing. No, I’m just saying they have a way of behaving, a way of being that makes the bullying possible. Their torturer feels that if he attacks this person, he will succeed in having a really negative impact on them, whereas it wouldn’t necessarily work with others.”
“That’s horrible!”
“Yes.”
“What makes a person end up in this category?”
“It’s complicated. There may be several elements, but the most decisive,
no doubt, is that they lack self-esteem. If they aren’t sufficiently convinced of their value deep down, they present a flaw that certain types spot at once. Then the bully only has to press where it hurts.”
I suddenly needed air.
“Could we open a window?”
He got up and opened the window wide. The soft, warm air, full of
moisture from the tall trees, filled the room, bringing us the calming scents of summer evenings. I could hear the gentle cheeping of birds hidden in the foliage of the tall plane trees, while the majestic branches of the century-old cedar calmly swayed.
“I wonder if ... I think that ... I’m perhaps a little lacking in self-esteem. In fact, it’s not that I don’t like myself, it’s not that, and in any case I feel ... normal, but it’s true that I’m easily thrown off when I’m being blamed or criticized.”
“I think so, too,” Dubreuil said. “Next time, I’ll give you a task to develop your self-esteem, your self-confidence, so you’ll be stronger deep down.”
I wondered if I wouldn’t have done better to keep quiet.
“To get back to the point, I believe that you can change your manager’s opinion and attitude by changing yourself, but that’s not going to change the

 course of events in the company. That would require you to know how to communicate well. But I’m convinced that you could convince your managers, who you complain about all the time, to change their opinion on certain points. You should be able to influence them and gain progress on certain fronts.”
“It won’t be easy.”
“You say that because you don’t as yet know how to go about it. And don’t forget that when a situation really doesn’t suit you, you can always move to a different company. If you knew the number of people dissatisfied with their job, who complain about it and stay put. Human beings are afraid of change, of novelty, and they very often prefer to remain where it’s familiar, even if that’s very unpleasant, than to leave it for a new situation that they don’t know.
“It’s Plato’s cave,” Dubreuil said. “Plato described people who had lived all their lives in a very dark cave that they had never left. The cave was their universe, and despite it being murky, it was familiar and therefore reassuring. They obstinately refused to set foot outside because not knowing the exterior world, they imagined it to be hostile, dangerous. Consequently, it was impossible for them to discover that this unknown space was, in fact, filled with sun, beauty, freedom.
“Lots of people today live in Plato’s cave without realizing it. They are scared stiff of the unknown and refuse any change that affects them personally. They have ideas, plans, dreams but never carry them out, paralyzed by a thousand unfounded fears, bound hand and foot by shackles they alone have the key to. The key is hanging around their neck, but they’ll never grab hold of it.
“I believe life itself is made up of change, of movement. There’s no sense in clinging to the status quo. Only the dead are immobile. It’s in our interest not just to accept change but to initiate it, so that we can evolve in a way that suits us.”
Dubreuil poured himself a splash of bourbon and added some ice cubes that clinked in his glass.
I had a sudden inspiration. “Speaking of change, there is one I would really like, but I can’t make happen, even though I’m the only one concerned: I want to stop smoking. Could you do something?”
“It depends. Tell me a bit more. Why do you want to stop?”

 “For the same reasons as everyone: It’s filthy, and it slowly kills you.” “Right. So what’s stopping you from giving it up?”
“To be honest, I like it. It’s difficult to give up something you enjoy. I
would miss it, especially in times of stress, when it helps me unwind.” “Okay, then imagine there exists something else that’s really good, that’s nice to take and relieves stress into the bargain. You can use it whenever
you like. Imagine. In those circumstances, you’d easily stop smoking?” “Perhaps... .”
“That’s not a very convincing reply. Imagine: You’ve got this magic
substance that brings you pleasure and helps you unwind whenever you need it. Do cigarettes give you anything else?”
“No.”
“So, what’s to stop you giving up in those circumstances?”
As hard as I imagined a miracle substance that would give me pleasure
and relaxation on demand, something upset me about giving up cigarettes. What? What could it be? It was as if I could vaguely feel the answer without being able to express it. It took me a long time before it came out, and then it seemed self-evident.
“Freedom.”
“Freedom?”
“Yes, freedom. Even if I want to give up tobacco, there is such social
pressure to give it up that I feel as if it wouldn’t really be my choice anymore, so I’d be losing my freedom if I stopped smoking.”
“You’d lose your freedom?”
“Everyone’s rabbiting on about smoking, saying ‘You should stop,’ so that if I did, I would feel like I’d given in to pressure, submitted to the will of others.”
A smile crossed his face.
“Okay. I’ll send you my instructions. You must follow them to the letter. As usual.”
I felt a draft behind me and turned around. Catherine had opened the door partway and slipped into the room. She sat down in a corner silently and gave me a little smile.
That’s when it caught my eye—a gray notebook, quite big, laid on the desk. On the cover, I could read my name upside down, written in block letters in black ink and underlined with a rapid but firm stroke. Did

 Dubreuil have a whole notebook on me? I had a burning desire to read it. What did it contain? The list of the trials he was going to impose on me? Notes about me, about our encounters?
“Right,” Dubreuil resumed. “Let’s take stock of where you are overall. You’ve learned to show disagreement, to express your wishes and desires, and to assert yourself in your relations with others.”
“In sum, yes.”
“Now—and this goes back to what we were just saying—you must learn to communicate better with others. It’s fundamental. We’re not alone on earth. We inevitably relate to others and interact with them, and we don’t always set about it very well. There are useful things to know in order to be appreciated and respected by others, and have good relations.”
There was something I didn’t like about the way he put it.
“I don’t want to apply techniques to communicate better. I want to stay myself and not have to say or do special things to have good relations.”
He looked at me, taken aback.
“In that case, why did you agree to learn language?”
“Pardon?”
“Yes, you speak French, even English. Why did you agree to learn those
languages?”
“That’s different.”
“How? You weren’t born speaking them. You learned them. You learned
the rules, and now you apply them in order to express yourself. Do you have the feeling of not being yourself when you speak?”
“No, of course not.”
“Are you sure? To remain really natural, perhaps you’d prefer expressing yourself in onomatopoeia, in sounds that stand for words—plop, splash, bang—or by making bellowing noises.”
“But I learned language when I was a child. It makes a big difference.”
“So does that mean that what we learn before a certain age is part of us and what is learned after that age is artificial and we’re not ourselves when we use it?”
“I don’t know, but I don’t feel natural when I don’t do things as they come to me spontaneously.”
“Shall I tell you what I think?” “What?”

 “It’s still resistance to change! That’s the main difference between the child and the adult: The child wants to evolve. The adult does all he can not to change.”
“Perhaps.”
“I’ll tell you my opinion.”
He leaned slightly forward and spoke in a confidential tone.
“When you don’t want to change anymore, it’s because you’re slowly
beginning to die.”
I swallowed hard. Catherine started to cough. Outside, a bird gave a cry
that sounded like mocking laughter.
“I have realized a disturbing fact,” he went on. “In most people, the will
not to change their behavior appears somewhere between twenty and twenty-five. Do you know what that age corresponds to biologically?”
“No.”
“It’s the age at which the brain finishes developing.”
“So perhaps it’s not by chance,” I said, “that that’s the age when we don’t
want to change anymore. Perhaps it’s natural.”
“Yes, but that’s not the end of it. For a long time we thought that the
number of brain cells diminished from then on, until the end of our life. But it has recently been demonstrated that we can continue to grow them as adults.”
“You’ve cheered me up. I was beginning to feel old.”
“Specifically, the process of regeneration can happen as a result of many factors, including apprenticeship. In short, if you decide to carry on learning and developing, you stay young. Body and mind are closely linked. Do you want proof?”
“Yes.”
“Official statistics from the Department of Health show that the moment most people retire, their health declines sharply. Why do you think that is? As long as they’re working, they’re more or less forced to adapt, to develop at least a bit in order not to be thought of as has-beens. As soon as they retire, they stop making an effort. They are fixed in their ways and decline sets in.”
“That’s cheerful.”
“To stay alive, you have to stay in life—in other words, to follow the movement of life, to develop. I know a woman who started playing the

 piano at eighty-one. That’s wonderful! Everyone knows it takes years of study to play piano properly. That means that at eighty-one, she thinks it’s still worth investing a few years to learn to play a musical instrument! I’ll bet you any amount that she’ll live a lot longer.
“If you want to stay young all your life, continue developing, learning, discovering, and don’t imprison yourself in habits that cause sclerosis of the mind, or in the numbing comfort of what you already know how to do.”
“Right. So what did you want to tell me about relationships?”
“Well, I’m going to tell you a secret. A secret that will allow you to relate to anyone, even someone from a different culture than yours. It will immediately make that person want to engage with you, listen to what you have to say, respect your point of view, even if it’s different from theirs, and talk to you sincerely.”
He took a sheet of ivory-colored paper and a black-laquered pen and started writing with a sweeping movement, the gold nib noisily scratching the paper. When he finished he held the paper out to me. The wet ink shone as if the paper refused to soak up a secret that was not meant for it.
Embrace your neighbor’s world, and he will open himself up to you.
I read it, reread it, and remained lost in thought. I liked the formula; it was like a magical inscription whose meaning still eluded me.
“Do you have the operating instructions that go with that?” I asked him.
He smiled. “If we were remaining on a purely mental level, I would express the secret differently. I would say something along the lines of ‘Try to understand the other person before trying to be understood.’ But it goes way beyond that. You can’t sum up the communication between two people as a simple intellectual exchange. It takes place on other levels as well, at the same time.”
“On other levels?”
“Yes, in particular on the emotional level. The emotions you feel in the presence of the other are perceived, often unconsciously, by him. If you don’t like him, for example, even if you succeed in hiding it perfectly, he will feel it one way or another. Your intention is also something that the other feels.”
“You mean what we’re thinking about during the conversation?”
“Yes, but not necessarily consciously. An example: office meetings. Most of the time in those meetings, when someone asks a question, he doesn’t

 really have any intention of getting an answer.”
“What do you mean?”
“His intention can be just to show that he can ask intelligent questions.
Or to make the person he’s talking with uncomfortable in front of the others, or to prove that he’s interested in the subject, or to claim a leadership role in the group. And quite often, it’s the intention behind the question more than the question itself that we pick up. When someone’s trying to trap us, we know it, don’t we, even if there’s nothing in their words we could objectively reproach them for?”
I nodded.
“I think things also happen on a spiritual level,” Dubreuil said, “even if it’s more difficult to demonstrate anything in this area.”
“Okay, so what do I do with your beautiful magical formula? How do I apply it?”
“Embracing your neighbor’s world involves, first of all, ripening your own wish to enter into his world. That means becoming interested enough in him to want to experience what it is to be in his skin. It means taking pleasure in trying to think like him, to speak like him, to move like him, to believe what he believes. When you manage that, you’ll be in a position to feel quite accurately what the other is feeling and to really understand that person. You will seem to be in sync with each other, on the same wavelength. You can, of course, return to your own position. But you will still preserve a quality of communication that is beneficial to you both. And you will notice that the other will try to understand you. He’ll start to take an interest in your world, moved in particular by a desire to make such a quality relationship last.”
“This is all a bit weird. Don’t forget I trained as an accountant. It’s not by chance, you know, that I’m very rational.”
“I’m going to try and make you feel this for yourself. We’re going to try an experiment that relates to one of the aspects I’ve just listed. I need to prepare a few things,” he said, getting up. “I need to go and get two chairs. We can’t do anything in these armchairs; we’re too cramped.”
He left the office, followed by Catherine. I heard them walking down the corridor. I felt divided: Part of me, drawn to these rather mysterious things about human relationships, was hopeful. Another part of me, more down to earth, was rather dubious.

 My eyes suddenly alighted on the notebook. The notebook ... It was so tempting to grab hold of it and glance inside. The noise of their footsteps died away. They must have gone into another room. It was now or never. I jumped up. The floor creaked under my feet. I froze. Silence. I went around the desk and stretched out my hand. Voices, footsteps. They were coming back! Damn! I went back to my chair, but the floor creaked so loudly that they must have heard. Don’t sit down, I thought. Pretend to be looking at the bookcase, the books.
They came in. I remained focused on the bookshelves.
“We’ll put them there,” Dubreuil said.
I turned around. They were placing the chairs facing each other, less than
a yard apart.
“Sit down here,” he said, pointing to one of them.
I sat down. He waited a second, and then sat down on the other chair.
“I want you,” he said, “to tell me how you feel when I’m opposite you
like this.”
“How I feel? Well, nothing special. I feel good.”
“Right. Then close your eyes.”
I did as he asked, wondering what he was going to do to me.
“When you open them again in a few moments, I want you to be aware
of what you feel and to tell me how that has changed. Go on, open your eyes.”
He was still sitting on the chair, but he had changed position. Now both his hands were on his knees, which wasn’t the case before. What did I feel? Slightly strange, but difficult to say exactly.
“I would say I feel strange.”
“Do you feel better or not as good as before?”
“What do you mean exactly?”
“When you get on the elevator with someone you barely know, you
generally feel less comfortable about talking with them than if you met them on the street, agreed? That’s what I’m talking about. I want you to evaluate your communicational comfort in relation to my position.”
“Right. That’s clearer.”
“So, I’ll ask the question again: If you had to hold a conversation with me, would you feel more or less comfortable since I’ve changed my position?”

 “Less.”
“Okay. Close your eyes again. There you are. Now open them.”
He had changed position again. His chin was resting in the palm of his
hand, his elbow resting on his thigh.
“I feel ... how shall I say? ... observed. Not very pleasant.”
“Right. Close your eyes again ... Okay, you can look. How do you feel
now?”
“Much better!” This time he was slumped down in the chair with both his
forearms resting on his thighs.
“Let’s start again.”
He took up a dozen or so positions in succession. With two or three of
them I felt decidedly better than with the others.
“Catherine?” he said, turning toward her.
“It’s quite definitive,” she said to me. “Each time Yves adopts the same
position as you, you say you feel better. As soon as he assumes a different position from yours, you feel less at ease.”
I became aware of how I was sitting. “You mean that each time I felt good, it was because he sat like me?”
“Yes,” she said.
“This is crazy! Is it like this for everyone?”
“Yes. To be precise,” added Catherine, “it’s like that for the great
majority of people but there are a few exceptions.”
“Stop quibbling, Catherine! It makes no difference.”
“But how can it be explained?” I asked.
“It’s a natural phenomenon that was discovered by some American
researchers,” Dubreuil explained. “I think they began by showing that when two people are communicating well, when they’re getting along, they unconsciously synchronize with each other and end up adopting similar postures. We all notice it. For example, when you see two lovers in a restaurant, it’s not unusual for them to be in the same position, whether it’s with their elbows on the table, or their heads in their hands, or leaning backward or forward, or fiddling with the cutlery.”
“That’s astonishing.”
“And then these researchers showed that you could re-create that feeling of resonance by reversing the process. If you consciously synchronize yourself with someone, it will help both of you feel good with each other,

 which increases the quality of communication. But for this to work, it’s not enough just to use it as a technique. You have to sincerely want to embrace the other’s world.”
“Obviously, it’s unsettling,” I said, “and you’re going to think I’m putting up resistance again. But if you have to study the gestures of the person you’re talking to and adapt yourself accordingly, you’ll lose all sense of naturalness!”
He gave a little amused smile. “Can I tell you something?” “What?”
“You do it already—naturally.” “Not at all!” I insisted.
“I can assure you, you do.”
“Come off it! I knew nothing about all this five minutes ago!”
His smile broadened. “What do you do when you want to relate to a
young child of two or three?”
“It doesn’t happen every day.”
“Remember the last time.”
“Well, I talked to the super’s son, perhaps a couple of weeks ago. I asked
him to tell me what he had done during the day at nursery school.”
As I replied to Dubreuil, I became aware of a truth that was all the more astounding for being fresh in my memory: In order to talk to little Marco, I had crouched down, bringing myself down to his height, and I had naturally adopted a soft voice and chosen the simplest words possible, the closest to his vocabulary. I had done all this naturally. I had made no special effort. I had just had a sincere desire to get him to tell me what a French nursery
school was like.
“And do you know what the most incredible thing is?” Dubreuil
continued. “When you manage to create that quality of communication and maintain it for a period of time, it’s such a precious experience that each person unconsciously does everything to make it last. Just consider the gestures, for example. If one person changes position even slightly, the other follows suit without realizing it.”
“You mean that if I mirror someone’s posture for a while and then change position, the other person will change to match mine?”

 “Yes. But remember, the main thing is to be sincere in your intention to relate to the other person.”
“This is absolutely staggering!” I was so excited by this revelation. I felt as if until now I had been deaf and blind to aspects of my exchanges with others. It was amazing to discover that beyond our words there are heaps of things going on that we aren’t even aware of, messages exchanged by our bodies. And Dubreuil had hinted at even more levels of communication.
I begged him to tell me more, but he said I had seen enough for today. He and Catherine accompanied me to the door. I was still having difficulty figuring out Catherine’s personality and the role she played for Dubreuil. She was one of those people who says little, wrapping themselves in a cloak of mystery.
I had already left the château and walked a few steps across the garden toward the gate, watching Stalin out of the corner of my eye, when Dubreuil called me back.
“Alan!”
I turned around.
“Come back! I almost forgot to give you your mission.”
I froze. No, there was no escape.
I went inside and followed him across the hall, our steps ringing out on
the cold marble. We went into a room I didn’t know. It had the atmosphere of an old London club. Bookcases entirely covered the walls up to the ceiling, which had ornate mouldings. Two chandeliers, each with a dozen lights covered by brandy-colored shades, gave off a warm, intimate glow. Mahogany stepladders leaned against the shelves. Persian rugs covered a large part of the parquet floor. There were deep armchairs upholstered in dark leather, along with a pair of padded club chairs and an immense chesterfield sofa.
Dubreuil picked up a big book. Catherine remained at the door, watching us attentively.
“Give me a number between zero and a thousand.” “A number? Why?”
“Just give me a number!”
“Three hundred twenty-eight.”
“Three hundred twenty-eight. Let’s see, let’s see ...”

 He had opened the book and was turning the pages, obviously looking for the one with the number 328 on it.
“Here we are. Good. Now, give me another, let’s say between zero and twenty.”
“What is this?”
“Come on!”
“Twelve.”
I looked more closely at the book. It was a dictionary, and his finger was
going down the words on the page.
“... Ten, eleven, twelve. Marionette. That’s quite good. You could have
been less lucky. It could have been an adverb, for example.”
“Okay, are you going to tell me what this is about?”
“It’s very simple. You told me you had two bosses at work, yes?”
“Yes. That’s to say, I have one manager I report to and then his boss, who
often intervenes.”
“Good. You’re going to go and see them both, in turn. Find a pretext to
get them talking, and your mission consists of getting each of them to say the word marionette once.”
“What?”
“And there is one rule: You absolutely must not say the word yourself, or point to a photo or any object representing a marionette.
“What’s the point of all this?”
“Best of luck!”
I took my time leaving the château, lingering on the steps to look up at
the stars. It is rare to be able to see them in Paris. The sky usually seems opaque in the glow of the City of Light.
I was a little annoyed not to see the point of the task Dubreuil was giving me. In the past, I had certainly balked at following his directives because they required considerable effort from me, but I had always understood their usefulness. This time, I couldn’t see it. And I hated the way he tended not to answer my questions, simply ignoring them! It was as if, having already gotten my promise to do what he said, he wasn’t going to tire himself convincing me. And when would this little game come to an end? Granted, he seemed sincere in his desire to pass on certain information, to get me to move on in life, but despite this, it was getting harder and harder to feel myself being managed in this way, even if it was by someone whose

 intentions were good. And were they really? He must have a good reason for taking care of me; he must be getting something back. But what?
I thought of the notebook. A notebook entirely devoted to me, probably containing the answers to my questions. It was a glaring reminder that my situation wasn’t normal. I couldn’t continue closing my eyes to what might be motivating a stranger to take an interest in me and advise me, not to mention dictate to me—all the while keeping a firm hold on me through the rules of a promise he had extracted from me under dreadful circumstances. A shiver ran down my spine.
It was really a shame I hadn’t had the time to look at the notebook during the few minutes when Dubreuil was out of the room. How frustrating! I’d missed an opportunity that might not be repeated. I absolutely must find a way to get hold of that notebook. Suppose I came back one night? With this heat, the windows probably stayed open.
A metallic noise brought me back to my senses. Stalin was running toward me, dragging his heavy chain behind him. I leapt to one side, just as the chain tightened, amid a storm of barking. His eyes wild, his fangs wet with slaver, Stalin answered my question: No, I would not be coming back at night. The night was his. Once released, he reigned as master over the grounds.
Catherine sat down on the chesterfield. Dubreuil offered her a Monte Christo, which, as usual, she refused.
“So, how do you think he’s doing?” he asked, picking up a cigar cutter.
Catherine’s eyes turned slowly toward the nearest lamp, while she reflected. She took her time before answering. “Rather well, but I could feel he was a bit upset toward the end. To be frank, I myself didn’t understand the meaning of the last task you gave him.”
“Make his bosses say a word chosen at random?”
“Yes.”
Dubreuil struck a large match, which burst into flame. He brought it to
his cigar, which he steadily revolved as he puffed at it. He leaned back in the deep armchair. The leather squeaked as he crossed his legs.
 
“The problem with Alan is that it’s not enough to show him how to communicate well. That’s not the way to get anywhere in his firm, and that’s what he’d like. There’s something that would hold him back, in any case.”
“What?”
“He’s too used to being dominated. He’s gradually learning to resist, to oppose. That’s fine. But it’s not enough. Far from it. Knowing how to resist and knowing how to obtain what you want are two different things. To get there, there’s a precondition.”
“A precondition?”
“Developing in yourself the conviction that you are capable of it.”
“You mean that if Alan isn’t convinced deep down that he is capable of
getting something from his managers, he won’t get it, even if he conscientiously applies the best communication techniques in the world?”
“Exactly! When you are intimately convinced that you can influence other people’s decisions, you always succeed in the end, even if you’re slightly shaky at first. You find a way. On the other hand, if you don’t believe in your ability, you’re going to stop at the first obstacle, and you’ll interpret it as a proof of the pointlessness of what you’re doing.”
He lifted the cigar to his mouth.
“And so you asked him to amuse himself getting his bosses to say a specific word, just to get him to discover that he is capable of having an influence on them?”
“You’ve understood everything. I want him to believe in his ability to have an influence.”
“Interesting.”
Catherine suddenly looked up as an idea occurred to her. “You didn’t really select that word at random, did you? You chose marionette so that Alan would unconsciously project himself into the role of the person who holds the strings, isn’t that so?”
By way of an answer, Dubreuil just smiled. “Very clever, Igor.”
He took a long puff on his cigar.
MARC DUNKER, CEO of Dunker Consulting, was an imposing figure. Well over 6 feet tall and 210 pounds, he was a heavyweight in the recruitment world in France.
He came from a village in the provinces, in the heart of the Beaujolais region. Cattle dealers, the Dunkers were not well respected by the local inhabitants, who regarded their profession as a necessary evil. The family had more money than the farmers around them, many of whom felt that this money had been made at their expense, without the Dunkers having to suffer, like them, during the lean years when the price of beef fell.
Young Marc went to the local school. Proud to be the son of the richest man in the village, in other respects he felt excluded. He didn’t feel sorry for himself because of that; on the contrary, it fed his aggression. At the slightest remark from his schoolmates, he would pick a fight.
His mother suffered a lot more from being ostracized. While her husband enjoyed an envied position, she was merely subjected to its negative fallout, the subtly hostile looks and unspoken resentment of the women she passed in the village streets. After years of bitterness, she finally cracked, and breaking with the tradition established by generations of Dunkers, the family moved to Lyon, far from malicious village gossip. Marc’s father had to travel miles each day to return to the village. Marc viewed the move as a capitulation and despised his father for having given in to his wife’s unspoken demand.
Marc’s mother’s satisfaction with the move was only temporary. She became disillusioned the day she realized that she and her family were seen as inferior by their neighbors, who were largely white-collar workers. Preferring to be rejected out of jealousy rather than out of contempt, Marc, too, suffered from this new exclusion, and developed a desire for revenge.
 He was an average student, earning a diploma from a technical school when he was 20. He worked for nearly ten years selling agricultural goods, using negotiating skills no doubt fixed in his genes. He changed companies three or four times, each time increasing his salary substantially. He used the same ploy every time—deceiving the recruitment consultant about the post he was leaving, claiming responsibilities that weren’t part of his job but that he had taken on himself.
He concluded from this that consultants knew nothing about their work and were easy to deceive. One day, Marc’s employer revealed the amount of the fee he had paid to recruit him. To Marc, it was an astronomical sum for a job that seemed to be very close to his father’s. He decided it was easier to convince a company of the supposed qualities of a candidate than to sell a farmer on the physical attributes of a cow—assets the farmer could easily check for himself.
Six months later, Marc went into business for himself. After completing a crash course in recruitment methods, he rented a one-room office in the center of Lyon and put up a sign: Marc Dunker, Recruitment Consultant. What he took away from the course was that his flair was worth more than any of their techniques for selecting a candidate. And the fact is, he seldom failed. He was a natural. He had an intuitive sense of people and companies, and which candidates were going to fit a post.
The first clients were the hardest to find. Without references, he wasn’t credible. When people pointed that out to him, he became strangely aggressive. He started lying, inventing prestigious clients for himself, tossing around the names of companies whose business he had supposedly turned down on the grounds that they were too small to be worthy of his services. This attitude paid off, and he got his first contracts, quickly followed by others.
Marc Dunker’s new trade fitted him like a glove. The middle-class people who had looked down on his family in the past now depended on him for jobs. He felt feared and respected. People were eating out of his hand. He would have liked to control the whole recruitment market in Lyon, just to increase their dependence on him.
All his success, however, was not enough to repair his wounded ego. Something inside him was always pushing him to do more to develop his

business and to gain more power and authority in his field. Always a hard worker, he redoubled his efforts to establish his company.
By the end of the first year, Dunker already employed three consultants. But instead of being satisfied, he was driven to go even further. Six months later, Dunker opened an office in Paris and immediately moved to the capital. At that point, he renamed the company Dunker Consulting. After that, he opened a new office in a provincial town every three months on average.
Dunker measured his success by the number of his employees, his obsession being to increase his staff. He derived great satisfaction from “multiplying the flock,” as he liked to put it, not realizing that the colloquialisms he used revealed the provincial origins he otherwise carefully hid. His personal value seemed to be intimately linked to the number of people he had under his command, his power measured by the extent of his troops.
The meteoric rise of his company allowed Dunker to establish himself abroad, and when he opened his first office in another European capital, he felt he was conquering the world.
Two years later, in the supreme consecration, he decided to go public.
EVERY DAY FOR a week, I had arrived at the office with my copy of Closer under my arm. The sidelong glances of my colleagues, obvious to begin with, had given way to complete indifference. I had to admit that my relations with those around me hadn’t changed at all. Nonetheless, I still felt a certain embarrassment, even if it was diminishing. It would take me some time to be really free, according to Dubreuil’s definition.
In the apartment, I was making fewer efforts to be quiet than before. I had accepted that it was okay to make a normal amount of noise, which nonetheless didn’t fail to provoke almost daily visits from Madame Blanchard. I no longer sought to avoid her visits, but they still managed to annoy me prodigiously. It seemed as if nothing could stop her from harassing me. Having been very patient, I now openly expressed my exasperation, opening the door just a crack to show her that she was disturbing me. But she would come right up to the opening as if to force her way in. Frowning, with an accusatory expression on her face, she would harangue me in her shrill, moralizing voice.
The day after my most recent visit to Dubreuil I had just entered my office building and was waiting for the elevator with two colleagues from another department when I received a text message from Dubreuil: “Have a cigarette right away.”
What was that about? He wanted me to have a cigarette?
The elevator doors opened. My colleagues dived in.
“Don’t wait for me,” I said.
Why was Dubreuil asking me to smoke when my goal was to stop? I
went back out to the street and lit up. Was he going soft in the head? As I smoked, I was gazing at the passersby hurrying to work, when I saw a man who looked like Vladi standing motionless in the crowd. I leaned forward to try and get a better look, and he immediately turned around.
 “Vladi! Vladi!” I called.
The man disappeared from sight.
I felt a certain unease. I was almost certain it was Vladi. Was he
following me? But why? Surely Dubreuil wasn’t asking him to make sure I was keeping my promise? That would be insane. What did he care, after all. Or should I be seriously worried and try to find out why he was taking an interest in me?
I went back into the lobby, a knot in my stomach.
In the corridor on my floor, I passed Luc Fausteri’s office. He was already at work, which meant that he must have shortened his morning run. Most unusually, his door was open. Generally, he preferred to shut himself in, to isolate himself as far as possible from the members of his team.
This open door was an opportunity not to be missed. I had a mission to carry out. Be brave, I told myself. It would be all the harder to get Luc to say marionette because there was nobody in the world less chatty than him.
I said hello as I went in. He waited until I was less than a yard from him before looking up. We shook hands, but that didn’t elicit even the slightest smile.
I tried to strike up a conversation, reminding myself of Dubreuil’s famous secret. God, how hard it is to embrace a world you don’t like. “The share’s at one hundred and twenty-eight, this morning,” I said with false cheer. “It has gone up point two percent in just one day’s trading, and nearly one percent this week.”
“Yes.”
He was obviously in brilliant form. I must fuel the conversation, talk with enthusiasm, and show my keen interest in the subject. If he felt a meeting of minds, he would open up to me.
“What’s surprising is that it’s gone up fourteen percent since the beginning of the year, whereas our half-yearly results are up twenty-three percent. It’s not very logical.”
“No.”
“The stock is obviously underpriced ...”
“Yes.”
“In fact, it’s not representative of the real value of the company.” “No.”